In typical Kim Kardashian fashion, the E! star stole the spotlight at the Variety Power of Women Luncheon in NYC today, where she was honored for her work with Children's Hospital Los Angeles.

Not only did the Keeping Up With Kardashians star break her silence on stepfatherBruce Jenner's highly anticipated interview tonight, but she also opened up about her adorable daughter North West, who will celebrate her second birthday next month!

"She is getting so big," the proud mama, who looked stunning in an all-white Narcisco Rodriguez ensemble and Giambattista Valli heels, told E! News. "She says everything she lovesballet, tap, pianoshe is very very active. She is growing so big and so fast."

We bet! And thanks to Mrs. Kanye West's social media presence, fans can also keep up with 11 month old North, who we admit, looks pretty stinking adorable in her dance clothes.

So, how does the doting mother plan to top her daughter's first birthday celebration, which, as you may recall, was an elaborate "Kidchella" themed bash?

"We haven't planned it yet," she admitted. "I am trying to get through May because it is a really busy month, but we have to start planning. It's Kanye's birthday then her birthday a week later, so I have to figure out the two."

The entrepreneur, who was one of five ladies, including Lena Dunham, Whoopi Goldberg, Rachel Weisz and Glenn Close, to be honored at the event, was also asked about the most influential women in life her, and no surprise, she picked members of the Kardashian-Jenner clan.

"I would say my mother has always been a really strong influence in my life," Kardashian said of momager Kris Jenner.

PHOTO: Kim Kardashian shows off sweet wedding clutch at Power of Women luncheon

"They all are really inspiring," the 34-year-old added of her sisters. "I think Khlo is taking fitness and making it a really important part of her life and Kourtney lives a majorly organic lifestyle that is stronger all the time. She has inspired me to want to live my life like that and pushed me to want to work out more and eat healthyand to have North eat healthier."

In addition to spilling on her famous family, the social media star also opened up about her love of selfies, ahead of the release of her book Selfish,and revealed whether North is a fan of the popular snap.

"She has a computer of mine with all these movies and music on it and she was using it and I noticed in the photo booth in the computer that there were all these selfies of her that she did not realize she is taking, but she presses it and it is so funny. We do take lots of pictures together."

Asked whether she has ever taken selfies with the children she visits at the hospital, the stunning celeb replied, "Yes, never under estimate the power of a selfie!"

PHOTOS: See all the stars at the 2015 Variety Power of Women Luncheon