Lena Dunham Knows More About Elizabeth Hurley Than Kate Middleton: I'm Really Behind on Royals Culture
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
CTRL-C or CMD-C, then press Enter. Click/tap elsewhere to exit, or press ESC.

If you're wondering when Kate Middleton is going to give birth, you may not want to ask Lena Dunham.

But if you're curious to find out what happens on next week's episode of The Royals, she may just be the girl to ask.

"I know more about that show on E! about the royals then the actual royals," the Girls star admitted to E! News exclusively at the Variety Power of Women Luncheon in New York City. "I don't know to tell you the truth. I am really behind on royals culture."

In her defense, so many questions remain as fans around the world wait in anticipation for the birth of Prince William and his wife's second child. In regards to the due date, the baby's name or even the sex, it's all a royal mystery.

PHOTOS: The top 10 most magical princesses of all time

"I mean, I heard that the princess would be worth more, is that true?" Dunham asked. "But I wish them a healthy and happy birth."

Some experts would agree with Dunham's assumption that a baby girl could boost London's economy. According to Professor Joshua Bambfield, the director of the U.K.'s Center for Retail Research, a young daughter could result in millions of dollars.

"I think there will be an immediate boost of around 80 million pounds [or $119.4 million] when the baby is born," he told London's Telegraph. "There isn't as much excitement when it's the second baby, but a girl would have the potential to boost the fashion industry."

PHOTOS: Check out all the royal baby memorabilia

As royal baby watch continues, Dunham is hard at work on a new season of her hit HBO series Girls. When asked about any teases, the actress warned fans of a brand-new look.

"We just started shooting so right now I am just so excited to come back together," she told E! News. "Some people have new hair styles. I always love when we come back to a new season with a new hairstyle but besides that, I am not ready to reveal just yet."

Want to share the same TV habits as Lena? Then watch new episodes of The Royals Sunday nights at 10 p.m. only on E!

PHOTOS: More stars at the Variety Power of Women luncheon