Charlie White Marries Fellow Olympic Ice Dancer Tanith BelbinGet the Details!
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The 27-year-old, who won the gold medal for ice dancing at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi,wed longtime girlfriend and fellow Olympic ice dancer Tanith Belbin, 30, on Saturday at the Planterra Conservatory in Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, their reps told E! News in a joint statement.

The two exchanged vows in front of about 130 friends and family members and the bride wore an ivory, straplessModern Trousseuwedding A-Line gown with a pink ombr skirt and sweetheart neckline, according toPeople, which first announced the news and posted a photo of the happy couple.

Belbin, who is retired from competitive ice skating, also sported sparkling earrings and veil and kept her long blond hair loose. The groom looked sharp in a blackRalph Laurentux and a pale pink roseboutonniere.

Retired ice dancer Lauren Fenft was Belbin's maid of honor, while White's Olympic skating partner,Meryl Davis(pictured below, with White at the Sochi Olympics),and his three sisters served as bridesmaids and wore pink,Peoplesaid.

PHOTOS:Charlie White and Tanith Belbin kiss on the beach moments after getting engaged

Belbin's ice dancing partnerBenjamin Agosto, with whom she won the silver medal at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Italy, also attended the wedding,Peoplereported. That year, the two became the first U.S. ice dancers to win an Olympic medal in 30 years. They also came in fourth place at the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver. Belbin is originally from Ontario.

White and Belbin met in 1998 at aDetroit rink located not far from their wedding venue and have been dating since 2009,Peoplesaid. White announced their engagement last June, after competing on season 18 ofDancing With the Stars. He and dance partnerSharna Burgesscame in fifth place in the ABC dancing competition series.

The two recently reunited forDancing With the Stars' 10th anniversary special, which will air on Tuesday.

PHOTOS:Dancing With the Stars' craziest costumes of all time