Sophia Bush Mourns the Death of Dan Fredinburg: He Was One of The Great Loves of My Life
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
CTRL-C or CMD-C, then press Enter. Click/tap elsewhere to exit, or press ESC.

Google executive Dan Fredinburg is among the more than 10 people who died in a Mount Everest Avalanche.

His sister Megan confirmed the news on Instagram Saturday afternoon with an emotional post.

"I regret to inform all who loved him that during the avalanche of Everest early this morning, our Dan suffered from a major head injury and didn't make it," she wrote. "We appreciate all of the love that has been sent our way thus far and know his soul and his spirit will live on in so many of us."

Fredinburg's ex-girlfriend Sophia Bush also reacted to the news on social media with a heartfelt message to his family.

"There are no adequate words. Today I find myself attempting to pick up the pieces of my heart that have broken into such tiny shards, I'll likely never find them all," she wrote. "Dan Fredinburg was one-of-a-kind. Fearless. Funny. A dancing robot who liked to ride dinosaurs and chase the sun and envision a better future for the world. His brain knew how to build it. His heart was constantly evolving to push himself to make it so."

She continued, "He was one of my favorite human beings on Earth. He was one of the great loves of my life. He was one of my truest friends. He was an incredible brother, a brilliant engineer, and a damn good man. I'm devastated and simultaneously so deeply grateful to have known and loved him, and to have counted him as one of my tribe."

The Chicago P.D. star and Fredinburg started dated in March 2013 before calling it quits around February 2014.Both parties agreed the split was amicable and they remained friends after.

In fact, when the Google employee faced danger in a separate avalanche, it was Bush who alerted fans that he was a-okay.

"It was obviously really scary for all of us who love him and who love everyone on the trip," she told E! News. "It's a tight community."

While family and friends try to cope with the news, many will remember Fredinburg for all his wonderful attributes both on and off the snow.

"Please send a kiss to the sky for my friend Dan. His energy is so big and so bright, and it's all around us, so put some love toward him today," Bush shared with her followers. "And then hug your loved ones again. #goodbyesweetfriend #savetheice #Nepal"

She added, "Please remember that our time on this Earth is not guaranteed. Please tell those you love that you do. Right now. This very minute."

Our thoughts and prayers go out to all those affected by the avalanche.

PHOTOS: More stars who have passed away in 2015