Kris Humphries Posts Snarky Tweet After Bruce Jenner Interview, Then Clarifies MessageFind Out What He Said
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
CTRL-C or CMD-C, then press Enter. Click/tap elsewhere to exit, or press ESC.

Kim Kardashian's ex-husbandKris Humphriesrecently came under fire from scores of Twitter users, including a Teen Wolfactor, over a snarky tweet he posted just after Bruce Jenner, his ex-stepfather-in-law, revealed to ABC News'Diane Sawyer in a candid TV interview that he is transitioning from a man to a woman.

"Man, I'm glad I got out when I did. #Gottadoyou," Humphries, 30, tweeted on Friday night, about two hours after the two-hour interview finished airing on the East Coast and about an hour after it began airing on the West Coast.

READ: Everything we learned from Bruce Jenner's candid Diane Sawyer interview

The NBA player, who plays for the Washington Wizards and had appeared on Keeping Up With the Kardashianswhen he was married to Kardashian, later clarified his remarks following the online backlash.

"I have and always will support Bruce hence #Gottadoyou. Now recognize I was too vague and sincerely apologize for the way this came across," he tweeted on Saturday, adding, "#FullySupportBruce."

The Kardashian and Jenner family members have not responded to his remarks.

His initial tweet was retweeted more than 7,000 times and favorited more than 6,600 times and sparked a slew of angry and other negative comments from readers, including Teen Wolfstar Dylan O'Brien, who replied with a hashtag of his own and was praised for it by scores of people.

Other readers posted to Humphries, "Be careful there, your ignorance is showing," "I'm not a fan of Kim K. but what Bruce is doing is truly brave and honorable. I'm unfollowing bc I don't tolerate intolerance" and "You have no respect! You should be ashamed! And a little reminder Kim divorced you LOL."

Kardashian had filed for divorce from Humphriesin 2011 after 72 days of marriage.

CLICK: Bruce Jenner's new life as a transgender woman to be chronicled on E!

Bruce, 65, had told Sawyer, ''Yes, for all intents and purposes I am a woman" and talked about his personal journey and how his family reacted (read more about his interview here).

The Olympian and reality star's anticipated sit-down had spurred scores of supportive postson social media from hisloved ones, including his children, his Kardashian stepchildren and their mom and his third ex-wifeKris Jenner, 59, as well as celebrities and other fans, many of whom called him "brave" and "inspiring."

Bruce had said in the interview that Kardashian, 34, "has, by far, been the most accepting and the easiest to talk to about it" and that she told him that current husbandKanye West, 37, father of their 1-year-old daughterNorth West,"really turned me around."

"They were talking about it," Bruce said, "And he says to Kim, 'Look, I can be married to the most beautiful woman in the world, and I am. I can have the most beautiful little daughter in the room, I have that. ButI'm nothing if I can't be me. If I can't be true to myself, they don't mean anything.'"