In Character: How to Dress Like Mindy Lahiri From The Mindy Project
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Celebrity wardrobes are one thing, but step into the closet of your favorite onscreen character, and you're met with elements of drama, fantasy and, most importantly, a specific point of view.

In this series, we deconstruct the outfits of TV's most multidimensional charactersthe individuals who we can love, hate and still want to cop their look all in one episode.

This week, we take a look at Mindy Kaling's character on The Mindy Project. Fans of the show already recognize the brilliant styling and tailoring in the series; yet, Ms. Lahiri doesn't quite get the same style accolades as former TV trendsetters. We're putting an end to that, as Mindy's approach to mixing prints, bold colors and collecting classic Chanel bags needs to be acknowledgedstat!

MORE: Get The Royals' Princess Eleanor's look

Mindy is a big fan of accentuating her curves in classic pencil skirts. Don't get it twistedthese are not your mother's skirts. Opt for a statement bottom in a bold color with plenty of shimmer. Counteract the feminine skirt with an edgy leather jacket. Just don't forget a texturized clutch to top it off.

The good doctor is a master of mixing prints and playing with proportions. She also knows how to choose pieces that flatter her body type. Note the side panels on her gingham dress, which lengthens her body. When going for this look, opt for a plaid skirt with a hem that cuts at or below the knee. Pair the skirt with a tweed jacket that ends at the thigh. Make sure the patterns on jacket and dress are not too similar and top it off with colorful statement jewelry for the full effect.

INFOGRAPHIC: How much do you think this Hollywood It bag really costs?

We know Mindy loves her vibrant colors; thanks to smart styling, they're not distracting or ostentatious, but professional and tasteful. The trick is to go all out with one piece and keep it subtle with the others. Here, the yellow trench is the game-changer, but the floral dress and classic pumps would fare well alone, or together too.

PHOTOS: Looks from The Mindy Project's second season