Rob Kardashian Calls Bruce Jenner a Role Model After Diane Sawyer Interview, Kim Kardashian Shares Selfies
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
CTRL-C or CMD-C, then press Enter. Click/tap elsewhere to exit, or press ESC.

Rob Kardashiansurfaced on Twitter on Friday to share a heartwarming message of support for Bruce Jenner just after the Olympian and reality star revealed in a candid TV interview with Diane Sawyer that he is transitioning from aman to a woman.

Unlike his siblings, the 28-year-old son of the late Robert Kardashianand Keeping Up With the KardashiansmomagerKris Jenner, 59, Bruce's ex-wife,rarely tweets. Robhas kept out of the spotlight over the past year and has largely been absent from the reality show while dealing with some personal issues.

"You have always been a role model to me and now more than ever, I look up to you," he said. "LOVE YOU !! !!"

CLICK: Bruce Jenner's new life as a transgender woman to be chronicled on E!

Rob, who like his family, lives in the Los Angeles area, posted his tweet minutes after Jenner's interview aired on ABC on the West Coast. Hours earlier, while the TV special aired on the East Coast, Rob retweeted messages of support expressed byEllen DeGeneresand singerSam Smith.

Other celebsand more of Bruce's loved ones, including Kris, have also shared similar posts. Many have called him a "hero" and have said he is "brave" and "inspiring" for speaking out publicly about his personal journey.

However, ex-stepdaughterKim Kardashian's ex-husband,Kris Humphries, angered many people with asnarky tweetposted after the interview. He has not commented.

READ: Everything we learned from Bruce Jenner's candid Diane Sawyer interview

Bruce had said in the interview that Kardashian, 34, "has, by far,been the most acceptingand the easiest to talk to about" his journey. In addition to some earlier supportive tweets, she also shared on Friday night a couple of adorable selfies of the two together.

"Love is the courage to live the truest, best version of yourself," she said. "Bruce is love. I love you Bruce. #ProudDaughter."

"It might not always be easy but we support you no matter what!" she added. "Your honesty has opened the doors for others to be courageous and live an authentic life! #respect #hero #family."