Black-Market Injections, Third-Degree Burns, Reality Stars and MoreGet the Botched Season Two Premiere Recap! on Botched
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Dr. Paul Nassif and Dr. Terry Dubrow jumped right back into it on the season two premiere, consulting with three incredible patients.

The first patient we met on the season two premiere ofBotchedwasTiffany Pollard.She always dreamed of being famous, ever since she was young and saw the one and onlyDolly Partonon TV! "When I saw that white chick come on the screen, you know with her blonde hair, her tiny waist and her big tits, I said that's going to be me one day," she exclaims.

Tiffany made her rise to reality television stardom onFlavor of Loveand then went on to have her own show,I Love New York.

Between her two shows, she underwent a breast augmentation that didn't go as planned. They ended up being much larger than she anticipated.

"I've held back on so many things because I've felt uncomfortable with my breasts," she admits.

Next we met Rajee, who opened up about her transition from male to female. She admitted that around the age of four, she began to feel she was never like the other boys, "I never realized I was trans growing up, I thought I was just an effeminate gay male."

Around twenty she began taking hormones and wearing women's clothing but still felt like she wasn't complete. She added, "There was a girl in a community who was doing what we call pumping, and that is basically black-market injectables."

At first things were great, but about a year later she explains, "I woke up in the morning to the whole left side of my face feeling like a boil and all of a sudden the left side of my face exploded. It was oozing out almost like lava."

Next, Tiffany has her consultation with Dr. Dubrow and Dr. Nassif. She says this would be her third breast surgery, "I have so much extra skin, it's like elephant skin or something." She also wants to have her nose done because it's constantly leaking.

The third and final patient that we meet is Cristina who was in a freak, fire accident when she was ten-years-old. A huge ball of flame came on her and she ducked her face into the snow, but she still got third degree burns on her face.

She adds that she's been through ten reconstruction surgeries all over the world, to no relief. After meeting with Dr. Nassif and Dr. Dubrow, they agree to take her case on and help her feel comfortable in her own skin!

Then it's the first surgery day. During Tiffany's surgery, Dr. Nassif takes a little longer than expected on her nose, and Dr. Dubrow worries that her blood supply will not be strong enough for an entire breast lift. Plus, he doesn't want her to be under anesthesia for too long. So, they hold off on the breast surgery for a few weeks.

Next, it's Cristina's surgery day. They are going to divide her chin into three sections and lift the outer portions up, de-bulk them, remove skin and make them tighter. During surgery, Dr. Dubrow admits, "These cases are never easy." Once finished, Dr. Nassif and Dr. Dubrow are extremely proud of their work and even compliment each other.

Last but certainly not least, Rajee meets for a consultation with the dynamic doctor duo. Dr. Dubrow describes her as a "huggable teddy bear" and she fills the room with laughter and smiles throughout her entire appointment.

During the appointment, they decide it's safer to leave Rajee how she is. Otherwise, the safest next step would be to completely remove her breasts, which she is not a fan of. The doctors sweetly encourage her that they will always be here for her. They tell her if something becomes infected, "You contact us and we will take care of it and help fix the problem," Dr. Dubrow says.

Both Cristina and Tiffany had successful procedures and were ecstatic with their results!

Their family and friends were also overjoyed for each of them. These doctors are seriously miracle workers.

What did you think of the season two premiere?

For more plastic surgery craziness, watch a brand new episode ofBotchednext Tuesday starting at 9/8c only on E!

Tune in to a new episode ofBotchednext Tuesday at 9/8c on E!

PHOTOS: Can you guess if these busts are real or fake?!