Roll With It: 4 Hollywood-Approved Ways to Cuff Your Pants
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
You may think attaining the perfect pant cuff is a no-brainer. How hard could it be to roll them pant legs up, right? So why is one roll always bigger than the other? Why does it never look like Jessica Alba's perfect pair or Hilary Duff's casual cuffs? In the morning, half asleep and already late, this struggle is especially real.

No one feels your pain more than E! Style Collective member Lindsay Albanese. The celebrity stylist recently stopped by the E! News studios to show us four ways to master the pant cuff like a street style star.

TIPS: How to wear your man's clothes with confidence

The Backflip 

1. Probably the most underestimated of the pant cuff family, the backflip simply takes one solid fold up to the ankle. 

2. Smooth out the wrinkles and emphasize the fold crease.

The Perfectly Imperfect

1. Start with the backflip fold.

2. Cuff the pants again, bringing it three-quarters of the way up from the first fold.

3. Create a third fold (about one and a half inches thick) on the left side on your left leg, leaving the right side untouched. This should create an angular effect. Repeat this step on your right leg, folding up just the right side.

4. Loosen up the folds a bit for that tousled, unintentionally styled look.

NEWS: How much would you sacrifice for this It bag?

The Mini Roll

1. Start with a fold about one and a half inches thick.

2. Roll upwards, stopping at the lowest part of the calf. 

3. The faster you do this, the better, Lindsay advised. "It doesn't need to be perfect; you don't need to get particular with it at all."

4. Repeat on other side.

The Precision Cuff

Optional: Iron the bottom of your pants so that the hem and fabric are completely smooth. 

1. Fold the pant leg upwards, creating a two-inch cuff. 

2. Smooth out the crease, or the bottom of the fold, so that the cuff is perfectly rectangular and precise as you fold up. 

3. Repeat on the other side.

"If you want to stay current and contemporary, I'd stick around the ankle or low calf unless it's a boyfriend jean," the style savant suggested.