Candice Wiggins signs with New York Liberty
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Police: WNBA's Griner, fiancee Glory Johnson arrested Police: WNBA's Griner, fiancee Glory Johnson arrested

Police: WNBA players Brittney Griner, fiancee Glory Joh... Police: WNBA players Brittney Griner, fiancee Glory Joh...

WNBA star Brittney Griner arrested on assault and disor... WNBA star Brittney Griner arrested on assault and disor...

Brittney Griner arrested for assault, disorderly conduc... Brittney Griner arrested for assault, disorderly conduc... by SI Wire

Storm's rebuilding nearly complete after 2 top draft pi... Storm's rebuilding nearly complete after 2 top draft pi...

Seattle Storm draft Notre Dames Jewell Loyd with No.... Seattle Storm draft Notre Dames Jewell Loyd with No.... by SI Wire

Jewell Loyd taken first in WNBA draft by Seattle Jewell Loyd taken first in WNBA draft by Seattle

Loyd taken first in WNBA draft by Seattle Loyd taken first in WNBA draft by Seattle

Jewell Loyd happy with decision to turn pro Jewell Loyd happy with decision to turn pro

Loyd and Zahui B. shake up WNBA draft Loyd and Zahui B. shake up WNBA draft

APNewsbreak: Candace Parker to sit out part of WNBA sea... APNewsbreak: Candace Parker to sit out part of WNBA sea...

Liberty re-sign veteran forward Swin Cash Liberty re-sign veteran forward Swin Cash

Lisa Leslie thrilled to be selected for Hall of Fame Lisa Leslie thrilled to be selected for Hall of Fame

Diana Taurasi breaks bone in left hand in Russia Diana Taurasi breaks bone in left hand in Russia

AP source: Minnesota's Zahui B declares for WNBA draft AP source: Minnesota's Zahui B declares for WNBA draft

Curt Miller joins LA Sparks as assistant coach Curt Miller joins LA Sparks as assistant coach

Taurasi-less Mercury re-sign Bonner Taurasi-less Mercury re-sign Bonner

Jasmine Thomas signs multi-year deal to return to Dream Jasmine Thomas signs multi-year deal to return to Dream

LA Sparks re-sign center Jantel Lavender LA Sparks re-sign center Jantel Lavender

Becky Hammon returns to Garden as Spurs assistant coach Becky Hammon returns to Garden as Spurs assistant coach

Candice Wiggins signs with New York Liberty Candice Wiggins signs with New York Liberty

Facebook exec, NBA team up to get men to 'lean in' for... Facebook exec, NBA team up to get men to 'lean in' for...

Veteran Alana Beard re-signs with Los Angeles Sparks Veteran Alana Beard re-signs with Los Angeles Sparks

AP sources: Connecticut to host WNBA All-Star Game AP sources: Connecticut to host WNBA All-Star Game

Dream re-sign veteran center Erika de Souza Dream re-sign veteran center Erika de Souza

LA Sparks sign 2014 draft pick Jennifer Hamson LA Sparks sign 2014 draft pick Jennifer Hamson

LA Sparks add guard Elina Babkina from Latvia to roster LA Sparks add guard Elina Babkina from Latvia to roster

LA Sparks sign veteran guard Ana Dabovic of Serbia LA Sparks sign veteran guard Ana Dabovic of Serbia

Liberty acquire Epiphanny Prince for Cappie Pondexter Liberty acquire Epiphanny Prince for Cappie Pondexter

Delle Donne enjoys NBA All-Star weekend Delle Donne enjoys NBA All-Star weekend

Calipari, Mutombo, Kevin Johnson Hall of Fame finalists Calipari, Mutombo, Kevin Johnson Hall of Fame finalists

LA Sparks sign guard Erin Phillips, winner of 2 WNBA ti... LA Sparks sign guard Erin Phillips, winner of 2 WNBA ti...

Tamera Young agrees to deal, stays with Chicago Sky Tamera Young agrees to deal, stays with Chicago Sky

Evie Goldstein new director of ops for WNBA players uni... Evie Goldstein new director of ops for WNBA players uni...

LA Sparks sign Australian center Marianna Tolo LA Sparks sign Australian center Marianna Tolo

US women's basketball team retains assistants for Olymp... US women's basketball team retains assistants for Olymp...

Shavonte Zellous signs with Turkish club Fenerbahce Shavonte Zellous signs with Turkish club Fenerbahce

Taurasi to skip WNBA season; Russian team offers $ to r... Taurasi to skip WNBA season; Russian team offers $ to r...

Lauren Jackson to undergo more surgery on troublesome k... Lauren Jackson to undergo more surgery on troublesome k...

Diana Taurasi to sit out 2015 WNBA season Diana Taurasi to sit out 2015 WNBA season

Diana Taurasi to skip 2015 WNBA season Diana Taurasi to skip 2015 WNBA season

Mercury guard Diana Taurasi will not play 2015 WNBA sea... Mercury guard Diana Taurasi will not play 2015 WNBA sea... by SI Wire

Seattle Storm trade with Connecticut for No. 3 pick Seattle Storm trade with Connecticut for No. 3 pick

APNewsBreak: Ogwumike has microfracture surgery on knee APNewsBreak: Ogwumike has microfracture surgery on knee

AP Sources: Seattle Storm promote Boucek to be head co... AP Sources: Seattle Storm promote Boucek to be head co...

WNBA free agency starts with 23 unrestricted free agent... WNBA free agency starts with 23 unrestricted free agent...

New York rehires Bill Laimbeer as head coach New York rehires Bill Laimbeer as head coach

Storm look for new coach after Agler leaves for Sparks Storm look for new coach after Agler leaves for Sparks

AP sources: Brian Agler to coach the Los Angeles Sparks AP sources: Brian Agler to coach the Los Angeles Sparks