National League DH: Washington Nationals' Max Scherzer favors it
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Washington Nationals pitcher Max Scherzer is in favor of the National League adopting the designated hitter, he told CBSSports.com's Jon Heyman.

"I wouldn't be opposed," Scherzer told Heyman, when asked if he supported the universal DH.

"If you look at it from the macro side, who'd people rather see hitBig Papi or me?" Scherzer continued. "Who would people rather see, a real hitter hitting home runs or a pitcher swinging a wet newspaper? Both leagues need to be on the same set of rules."

Scherzer's comments were prompted by St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Adam Wainwright's injury. Wainwright injured his Achilles tendon while running out of the batter's box during an at-bat Saturday. He was placed on the disabled list Sunday and the team reportedly fears he will miss the rest of the season.

 Cardinals RF Jason Heyward leaves game with groin tightness

Scherzer, too, was recently injured while batting. He jammed the thumb on his throwing hand while hitting in Thursday's game and reported discomfort while trying to throw on Sunday. He is unsure if he will make his next scheduled start on Tuesday.

"Im not ready to rule it out completely, but I also have to be honest with myself," Scherzer said Sunday, according to CSN Washington. "Anytime you deal with an injury to your pitching hand, you literally have to be 100 percent to go back out there."

Scherzer spent his first two major-league seasons in the NL with the Arizona Diamondbacks, followed by five years in the AL with the Detroit Tigers. He signed with Washington this winter. He is a career .159 hitter and has struck out in 29.5% of his at-bats.

Yasiel Puig placed on DL after hamstring setback Yasiel Puig was placed on the 15-day disabled list for the first time in his major league career on Sunday. The Dodgers outfielder strained his left hamstring on Friday night  the same hamstring that forced him to miss four games over a five-game stretch last week.

- Dan Gartland