Fantasy baseball pitching report: Cueto eyeing another huge year
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
One week of the season is now in the books, and while that isnt anywhere near enough time to make any judgments, it is enough to appreciate some of the best performances we saw in the first seven days. This weeks Pitching Report looks beyond the Opening Day starts we focused on last week, moving on to the pitchers who starred, or flopped, once the spotlight of the first game of the season had been packed away for another year.

 MLB Power Rankings: Tigers take top spot after season's first week

Pitchers of the Week

Johnny Cueto, Reds: 14 IP, 14 K, 0.64 ERA, 0.71 WHIP

Cueto tossed seven shutout innings in his first start of the season, and that was only good enough for a no-decision. Five days later, he allowed one run in seven innings, and, as he should have expected, got a loss. Cueto is now 0-1 despite allowing a total of one run in his first 14 innings of the season. His fantasy owners would have been happier if the Reds offense gave him more run support this week, but they cant complain too much. Cueto always seems to get overlooked the best starting pitcher discussion, but that could change this year. He has finished in the top four in Cy Young voting in each of his last two healthy seasons, and would have been a shoo-in for the award last year if Clayton Kershaw hadnt put together one of the best pitching seasons in MLB history. Cuetos six-pitch arsenal is already giving hitters nightmares this year, and he looks well on his way to another huge fantasy year.

Scott Kazmir, As: 7 IP, 1 W, 10 K, 0.00 ERA, 0.43 WHIP

Bartolo Colon, Mets: 13 IP, 2 W, 13 K, 2.77 ERA, 0.77 WHIP

In a rotation filled with young guns who could eventually push the Mets back into the playoffs, it was the 41-year-old Colon who got the nod on Opening Day. He shut down the powerful Nationals, throwing six innings of one-run ball while striking out eight and allowing just four baserunners. He gave up three runs to the Braves over the weekend, but tossed seven mostly effective innings, surrendering six hits and whiffing five. Colons not going to strike out anywhere near a batter per inning for the entire season, but its remarkable that he has been able to retain significant fantasy value into his 40s. There are no tricks from him at this point, as pretty much everyone knows theyre going to see a heavy sinker with a four-seam fastball, slider and occasional changeup with Colon on the mound. He has been throwing the four-seamer a lot in the early going, but hes never going to stray from the sinker for too long. His next start comes on Friday against the Marlins.

Pitchers of the Weak

Mat Latos, Marlins: 0.2 IP, 0 K, 94.50 ERA, 12.00 WHIP

Taijuan Walker, Mariners: 3 1/3 IP, 3 K, 24.30 ERA, 3.30 WHIP

Walker has been a darling of the prospect and fantasy communities for a few seasons now, so when he had a strong spring, it placed him on the precipice of stardom in the minds of a lot of people. Stardom will have to wait at least another start, as Walker struggled mightily in his first outing of the season. The As tagged him for nine runs on nine hits and two walks in 3 1/3 innings, and cruised to a 12-0 win. Walker gave up more runs in his first inning in the regular season (three) than he did in 27 innings in spring training (two). As was the case with Latos, Walker dealt with poor command more than anything else. That has been an issue for him in the past, even while he was having a ton of success in the minors. Still, he improved on that during the spring, and the bet here is that his talent ultimately wins out and makes him, at worst, a top-40 fantasy starter this season. Hell take the ball again on Wednesday against the Dodgers.

Jeff Samardzija, White Sox: 13 IP, 7 K, 6.23 ERA, 1.31 WHIP