AP sources: Connecticut to host WNBA All-Star Game
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The best players in the WNBA and the league's rookies will be back at Mohegan Sun for the All-Star Game and the draft.

The home of the Connecticut Sun will host this year's All-Star Game on July 25 and the rookie draft on April 16.

''With a history of sellout crowds and record-breaking performances on the court, Mohegan Sun Arena has proved to be an all-star venue for our midseason showcase event,'' WNBA President Laurel J. Richie said. ''From our hosts - The Mohegan Tribe and the Connecticut Sun - to our players, and the diehard Connecticut fans, our previous All-Star weekends here have been unforgettable.''

It will be the fourth time the casino-hotel has hosted the All-Star contest. The arena held the game in 2005, 2009 and 2013. Los Angeles Sparks star Candace Parker was the MVP of the 2013 game.

In 2010, the arena also hosted an exhibition game between the WNBA All-Stars and USA Basketball called ''The Stars at the Sun.''

''We are thrilled that once again the eyes of the world will be on Mohegan Sun Arena,'' Connecticut Sun CEO Mitchell Etess said. ''The combination of the venue and our passionate fanbase makes us the perfect showcase for the WNBA All-Star Game. This will be our fourth time hosting this event and it is always a highlight of the summer. I know our fans will be excited to come out and support the best women's basketball players in the world.''

Last season's All-Star Game was played in Phoenix, and the East beat the West 125-124 in overtime behind game MVP Shoni Schimmel.

The Atlanta Dream rookie was at the Mohegan Sun for the WNBA draft last April. It was the first time fans were allowed to attend a draft since 2008 which created a great atmosphere for the players. The Connecticut Sun took Chiney Ogwumike with the top pick, much to the delight of the crowd.

Seattle has the No. 1 pick this year. The Sun have the fourth pick.

''Last year's draft was spectacular to see the number of people there,'' Etess said. ''The engagement of the audience, a live television event. I'm glad we could work it out to do it again.''

---

Follow Doug on Twitter at http://www.twitter.com/dougfeinberg