The Apple Watch has made a big splash (unsurprisingly). We don't know if it'll be a success by Apple's standards - the real test will be sales of the second-generation model - but it's definitely got people talking. And if we're going by the rate at which shipping estimates slipped from 24 April to June when the smartwatch became available to pre-order on 10 April, we think Apple has sold LOADS of Apple Watches already (it took a matter of minutes).

But which model of Apple Watch is right for you, your needs and your budget? Which edition, size, case material, colour and strap should you go for? Which is the best value-for-money choice? There are 38 combinations available and the choice can be overwhelming.

And if you're desperate to get your hands on an Apple Watch as soon as possible but haven't pre-ordered one yet, is there anything you can do? Read on to find out. (Hint: Yes, but don't queue outside an Apple Store as they won't have any!)

In our Apple Watch buying guide we explain all the options and help you decide a) which Apple Watch you want, b) which Apple Watch will suit you c) which Apple Watch you can afford and d) where to buy your Apple Watch from.

Apple Watch review | Complete guide to the Apple Watch (including lots of handy tutorials)

Apple Watch buying guide: Where can I buy an Apple Watch on launch day (24 April)?

Normally when Apple launches a new product there'll be queues miles long outside stores for days in advance, eagerly awaiting 8am when the doors will open and tired but excited customers can begin buying the hottest new tech.

This time, though, Apple is doing things differently. There's no early opening for the Apple Watch, no queuing outside the stores and in fact, you might not be able to buy an Apple Watch in an Apple Retail Store until as late as June.

Instead, Apple began taking pre-orders for the Apple Watch on 10 April and as mentioned above they quickly sold out, leaving some customers disappointed with their June delivery estimates. The lucky, fast-thinking pre-orderers will get their Apple Watch on 24 April, and will have already received an email confirming this. Others will get theirs throughout May and June.

You can still pre-order the Apple Watch on Apple's website, but expect a long wait before it arrives on your doorstep.

But what if you want to buy an Apple Watch on launch day? Is it possible? The answer is yes, but it's not going to be easy. There's eBay, but we don't recommend that. It'll cost you a lot more than you'd pay if you purchased the Apple Watch direct from Apple, and you risk falling for a scam (unfortunately there are many around).

There are also some brick-and-mortar stores that are going to stock the Apple Watch from 24 April, but you'll need to get in quick. In the UK, Dover Street Market in Mayfair, London, is going to be the only shop in the country selling the Apple Watch today.

It will open its doors at 11am, but if you want to buy the Apple Watch you will need to make an appointment in advance. The phone number required to make the appointment has now been revealed, but we imagine you'll have trouble getting through. Let us know if you've had any luck by Tweeting us @MacworldUK.

Sales will be limited to one Apple Watch per customer, and every customer will need to bring a compatible iPhone with iOS 8.2 or later installed in order to make the purchase. Photo ID may also be required.

Apparently there will be between 350 and 570 Apple Watches available, but the Apple Watch Edition is not among those in stock.

Maxfield in LA, Colette in Paris, Corner in Berlin and 10 Corso Como in Milan will also have Apple Watch stock on launch day.

Apple Watch buying guide: Apple Watch Sport, Apple Watch, Apple Watch Edition

Now that you know how to buy the Apple Watch, you'll need to decide which model you want to go for.

Your first decision is whether to choose the Apple Watch Sport (the cheapest model), the Apple Watch (the middle, standard version) or the super-expensive, luxury Apple Watch Edition. This choice will have a huge impact on what you end up paying.

The Apple Watch Sport is aluminium, and costs either 299 or 339. View on Apple Store

You get access only to the brighter and more colourful (and therefore in most people's eyes the least luxurious) looks and the most basic materials: the Sport version always comes in an aluminium casing (either silver or black in colour). And you can only choose from the cheapest strap option (the Sport Band, although you get more colour options for this than with the other watches). But in terms of functionality - the power of the components, battery life, general interface and software speed and the range of apps you'll be able to run - it's exactly the same as the most expensive versions of the Apple Watch.

The version called simply Apple Watch is stainless steel, and ranges in price from 479 to 949. View on Apple Store

This middle-band version of the Apple Watch come with a stainless steel case, which can be either a silver or black colour. It comes with the full range of straps - all six options - although the colour options for each of these aren't the same as for the Sport and Edition.

The Apple Watch Edition is gold (or to be more precise a gold alloy), and ranges from 8,000 to 13,500. View on Apple Store

This top-end version of the Apple Watch is made of an 18-carat gold alloy and comes in either a yellow gold or rose gold colour. These watches are available with three of the strap options: Sport Band, Modern Buckle and Classic Buckle.

Apple Watch buying guide: Should you buy the 38mm or 42mm size?

The Apple Watch comes in two sizes of case: 38mm or 42mm. The general interpretation is that these are designed to suit an average woman and an average man's hand/wrist dimensions respectively, but you needn't feel bound by that: there are no other changes to the design of the watch other than size - no explicitly masculine/feminine decorative elements etc. (Also, a bloke can wear a woman's watch if he wants to. Don't let anyone tell you different!)

The 38mm/42mm measurements represent the (approximate) height of the watch face, in millimetres. That's a bit weird, because when categorising sizes of smart devices we usually refer to the size of the screen, measured diagonally from corner to corner, in inches. (The iPhone 5s is a '4-inch smartphone', for instance.) But Apple seems to have decided to do things differently this time. We'll see if this sticks and becomes the de facto standard.

The full and exact dimensions of the two sizes of Apple Watch (height x width x depth) are:

'38mm model': 38.6mm x 33.3mm x 10.5mm

'42mm model': 42mm x 35.9mm x 10.5mm

Weight obviously varies according to the material.

The size of a wearable is a crucial, critical factor, and because of this I would recommend that you postpone the buying decision until you can be sure which size is right for you. That might mean buying in store rather than pre-ordering online; if you can get to an Apple Store or a reasonably well-appointed reseller then they will have watches in stock that you can try on before buying. (Even if they only have a couple of Sport models on hand, that could be enough for you to work out whether you want the 38mm or 42mm version of your favourite Apple Watch Edition, although I'd still recommend seeing the precise device you're buying in the flesh, as it were.)

In fact, Apple Stores should have a range of Apple Watches to try on from the 10th April - you won't be able to buy in store until the 24th, but you can see if they suit you can then go home and pre-order.

If you're desperate to pre-order and can't get to an Apple Store, at least run up a dummy model from paper or foam, using the dimensions above, and see which size seems more appropriate to your wrist.

Finally, bear in mind that the available configurations of material/colour/strap are slightly different for the 38mm and 42mm sizes - so your choice in this category will slightly reduce your options in others. I strongly recommend that prioritise size above other considerations, however. Don't be like the shoe shopper who goes one size too big because they're 90 percent off - the pain isn't worth it!

Apple Watch buying guide: Which colour do you want?

Each of the versions of the Apple Watch comes in two colours. The aluminium Apple Watch Sport and stainless steel Apple Watch both come in silver and Space Grey (black) versions of their respective materials; the gold Apple Watch Edition comes in yellow gold or rose gold (although in that case it's actually two different materials, technically speaking).

This doesn't affect the price, so pick whichever version you like best.

Apple Watch buying guide: Pick a strap

Your choice of strap does affect the price, fairly drastically in the case of the Apple Watch and Apple Watch Edition.

The six straps are:

Link Bracelet

Sport Band

Leather Loop

Classic Buckle

Modern Buckle

Milanese Loop

Each of these is available in multiple colour options, which vary according to the mode of Apple Watch you've selected.

Let's look at the full set of prices, when watch version, size and strap are taken into account:

Apple Watch Sport prices

38mm silver aluminium Apple Watch Sport with Sport Band strap (white, blue, green, pink): 299

38mm Space Grey aluminium Apple Watch Sport with Sport Band strap (black): 299

42mm silver aluminium Apple Watch Sport with Sport Band strap (white, blue, green, pink): 339

42mm Space Grey aluminium Apple Watch Sport with Sport Band strap (black): 339

View Apple Watch Sport buying options on Apple Store

Apple Watch prices

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with Sport Band strap (white, black): 479

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with Sport Band strap (white, black): 519



38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with Milanese Loop strap: 559

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with Milanese Loop strap: 599

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with black Classic Buckle strap: 559

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with black Classic Buckle strap: 599

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with black Modern Buckle strap: 649

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with midnight blue Modern Buckle strap: 649

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with soft pink Modern Buckle strap: 649

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with brown Modern Buckle strap: 649

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with black Leather Loop strap: 599

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with bright blue Leather Loop strap: 599

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with stone Leather Loop strap: 599

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with brown Leather Loop strap: 599

38mm stainless steel Apple Watch with Link Bracelet strap: 819

42mm stainless steel Apple Watch with Link Bracelet strap: 859

38mm space black Apple Watch with Link Bracelet strap: 899

42mm space black Apple Watch with Link Bracelet strap: 949

View Apple Watch buying options on Apple Store

Apple Watch Edition prices

38mm 18-carat rose gold Apple Watch Edition with Sport Band strap (white, black): 8,000

42mm 18-carat rose gold Apple Watch Edition with Sport Band strap (white, black): 9,500



38mm 18-carat rose gold Apple Watch Edition with rose grey Modern Buckle strap: 13,500

38mm 18-carat yellow gold Apple Watch Edition with bright red Modern Buckle strap: 13,500

42mm 18-carat yellow gold Apple Watch Edition with black Classic Buckle strap: 12,000

42mm 18-carat yellow gold Apple Watch Edition with midnight blue Classic Buckle strap: 12,000

View Apple Watch Edition buying options on Apple Store

Apple Watch buying guide: Which watch face should I get?

That's up to you, but it's a settings option, not a buying one. You don't need to specify a watch face when you buy. You can change the face whenever you like, so experiment and see which one you like best.

There are nine watch faces (which are further customisable, in terms of colours and so on):

Chronograph

Colour

Modular

Utility

Mickey Mouse

Simple

Motion

Solar

Astronomy

To find out more, visit our How to change the watch face on Apple Watch tutorial.

Best Apple Watch apps | Best Apple Watch games