Panel Round One

Our panelists answer questions about the week's news: The Whine and Crab.

PETER SAGAL, HOST:

Right now panel, time for you to answer some questions about this week's news. Maz, a British study has finally determined what men talk about when they get together at a bar. What is it, Maz?

MAZ JOBRANI: Sex?

SAGAL: Not according to this study.

JOBRANI: Sports?

SAGAL: Not according to this study.

JOBRANI: Sexual sports?

(LAUGHTER)

SAGAL: Again, not according to this study. According to this study, seems to smash the stereotype about men because according to this study...

JOBRANI: Men talk about their emotions.

SAGAL: Yes, they talk about their feelings, their relationships and their kids.

(SOUNDBITE OF BELL)

SAGAL: According to this study. Hidden cameras...

TOM BODETT: So saying, like, that guy really pissed me off. Does that count as talking about your emotions?

SAGAL: Possibly. Well, let me explain what happened. So this firm set up hidden cameras at several London pubs, and then they filmed about 70 hours of conversation among male friends. And they actually talked about how they felt, and it wasn't just thirsty and horny.

(LAUGHTER)

SAGAL: One guy talked, really, about his struggles with impotence.

BODETT: What kind of bar was this?

SAGAL: Well, I know.

(LAUGHTER)

SAGAL: Maybe it was one of those strange bars where women dress up as men. I don't know. But you're thinking to yourself, as I thought when I read this, this is ridiculous. I'm a man. I know this is not true. And, of course, it's ridiculous. The men knew the cameras were there. Of course they pretended to be sensitive and in touch with their feelings.

JOBRANI: In all honesty, if I'm in a bar with my buddy, we're like watching the TV - we're watching the screen. We're not even talking.

FAITH SALIE: That's not why men get together, to talk to each other.

SAGAL: No.

SALIE: They get together to get away from talking.

JOBRANI: To get away from talking. The kids and my wife are at home. I've got an hour to watch whatever sport game it is. I'm going to watch it, have a drink and go home. And just- and then pretend like I had a bad time but actually it was a break.

(LAUGHTER)

JOBRANI: It's a break. It for - like we get short breaks during the day in the bathroom.

(LAUGHTER)

SALIE: They're not that short.

JOBRANI: Well, what are we - I extend it as much as I can, but I got young kids so they keep coming. So you get your short breaks, and that's like your lunch break. You go to the bar for an hour and then you come back and you're like, oh God. OK, what'd you talk about? Nothing really. And then, you know, unless if the cameras are on...

SAGAL: Exactly.

JOBRANI: ...In which case - my feelings.

SAGAL: Yes. Coming up, our panelists discover that someone has been lying this whole time. It's our Bluff The Listener game. Call 1-888-WAIT-WAIT to play. We'll be back in a minute with more of WAIT WAIT ...DON'T TELL ME from NPR.

Copyright  2015 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by a contractor for NPR, and accuracy and availability may vary. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Please be aware that the authoritative record of NPRs programming is the audio.