Business schools like to say theyre at the leading edge of corporate innovation, boasting on-campus incubators and electives on design thinking. But almost all rely on a teaching tool thats barely changed in more than a century. To learn how to lead companies, MBA students read hundreds of case studiesstripped-down narratives about a strategy problem at a real companyand discuss how they would tackle the challenge.

For Harvard Business School, which created and popularized the method the school taught its first case in 1912case studies are a cottage industry as well as a bedrock of the curriculum. Harvard Business Publishing says it sells to about 4,000 schools globally; its cases account for 80percent of the case studies used.

HBP, which also publishes other business materials, had revenue of $194 million in 2014, according to the business schools annual report, a 44percent increase from 2010. The publisher, which doesnt break out revenue from case studies, says it sold 12million cases last year, to schools, companies, and others. Retail prices run from $9 to $15 for a basic case study; schools get discounts. Case sales far outpace sales of HBPs other books and subscriptions to the Harvard Business Review, which it also publishes.

The case method takes the learner through a reflective and analytic process that is very powerful, says Robert Bruner, dean of the University of Virginias Darden School of Business. Some of Harvards case studies seem hardly more sophisticated than Wikipedia entries, and thats deliberate, says Willis Emmons, director of Harvards C. Roland Christensen Center for Teaching and Learning. Our cases are intentionally very limited in the amount of analysis they include, he says. The challenge for the student is to take both qualitative and quantitative information and make sense of that.

HBP also sells teaching notes for business professors to facilitate class discussion of the cases. These include suggestions for specific words instructors should write on blackboards. At Harvard Business School, professors are given detailed profiles of their students, called class cards, that dictate the order and timing of whom they call on in a typical 80-minute class. The stronger and more experienced a faculty member is, the less visible it is how much work has gone into a session, says Emmons.

The sheer scale of Harvards publishing machine helps it maintain dominance in the case market. Darden Business Publishing calls itself the second-biggest publisher of cases in the U.S., but it sold fewer than 700,000 cases in 2014, according to Steve Momper, DBPs executive director. HBP produces and distributes co-branded case studies for about 40business schools. These include the University of California at Berkeleys Haas School of Business, which launched a case series last year. Haas has no designs on challenging Harvards market share; the school publishes cases to strengthen its brand and showcase the technology industry expertise of its Bay Area-based staff, says Richard Lyons, the dean.

Case publishers often try to add variety to material that, well into the 1970s, featured subjects that were virtually always male and in settings that were quite prominently in the U.S., says Dardens Bruner, who received an MBA from Harvard Business School in 1974. HBS is trying to reflect a more modern business landscape. In 2014, Nitin Nohria, dean of the business school, pledged to raise the share of women protagonists in Harvard cases to 20percent. Cases increasingly incorporate video and Web-based elements, and a few find business lessons in unconventional sources, such as the case HBP published last year by Harvard professor Anita Elberse devoted to Beyoncs surprise 2013 album release.

Of the 25 top business schools ranked by Bloomberg Businessweek last year, 19 reported that they use case studies as one of their main teaching tools. At HBS, 80percent of class time is spent on case studies; at Darden, the figure is 75percent.

Carnegie Mellons Tepper School of Business uses case studies for about 30percent of its instruction, according to Dean Robert Dammon. It considers them a supplement to management science, a teaching method developed at Tepper. The school was really founded to find an alternative approach to business education than the one that was being offered by schools like Harvard, says Dammon. In a case study, the relevant set of facts is laid out for you. Most business problems arent presented to you in that way.

The bottom line: The publishing arm of Harvard Business School sells case studies to about 4,000 business schools worldwide.