Even though he wont be fully promoted until next season, Chase Elliott is proving to be a quick study in the Sprint Cup Series.

In only his second career Cup start, the defending Xfinity Series champion had an impressive 16th-place finish in Sundays Toyota Owners 400 at Richmond International Raceway.

But dont take our word for it, take team owner Rick Hendricks word for it.

Chase drove such a good race, Hendrick said. I think he drove up to 11th on the green, stayed out of trouble, great feedback.

He sounds just like a 10-year veteran, never gets rattled, good feedback and the car was never off. For him to come out here and finish 16th, Im really proud of him. That just shows how mature he is.

The 19-year-old Elliott is set to replace Jeff Gordon in the legendary No. 24 car next season.

Elliott finished a disappointing 38th in his Cup debut at Martinsville a few weeks ago, but he was spot-on in Sundays race, completing all 400 laps and staying out of trouble.

Prior to the start of the race, crew chief Kenny Francis told Elliott a good goal would be to finish all 400 laps and to earn a top-20 finish.

Mission accomplished.

I felt like we had a really solid day overall, Elliott said. I was a little disappointed though there at the end that I fell back and then couldnt get going at the restart.

But overall, everybody on our NAPA team did great this weekend. I thought we had a fast car, especially in race trim. The guys made good adjustments to qualify where we did. We had a great car on the long run.

We could really run well and run some guys down late in the run. Unfortunately, it always comes down to the short runs in these things. So, well try to get better and hopefully try to have a better effort at Charlotte (next months Coca-Cola 600).

Hendrick paid Elliott a big compliment by comparing him in-part to six-time Sprint Cup champ Jimmie Johnson.

He amazes me, Hendrick said of Elliott. What amazes me most about him is how calm he is and the feedback he gives and hes right on the money. He never gets excited. The tone in his voice never changes, kind of like Jimmie (Johnson).

Follow @JerryBonkowski