Three of the most expensive Limited Edition games ever made: Who's buying a $1,000,000 game?
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Posted by Lewis Painter

The release of EAs much-anticipated Battlefield Hardline saw the standard edition being sold for 55 on the Playstation Store. While I thought this was a tad expensive (what happened to the days of 40 games?) I saw the Battlefield Hardline Ultimate Edition and its 105 price tag. I was intrigued at the price, assuming that there must be a good reason for almost doubling the price  but there isnt.

All it includes is the Deluxe Edition of Battlefield Hardline, which includes the game with three specialised and ten gold battlepacks, along with Battlefield Hardline Premium. Personally I think that if youre paying almost double the amount of the standard game, you should get something physical along with it  a replica gun or a headset from the game, for example.

This got me wondering about other special edition games and their asking prices, and I found some amazing packages

Saints Row IV The SUPER DANGEROUS WAD WAD Edition - $1 million (672,461)

The most expensive and exclusive Limited Edition game crown goes to Saints Row IV with its SUPER DANGEROUS WAD WAD Edition, with only one being produced and costing an eye watering $1,000,000. But what do you get for $1,000,000? You get to live like a rock star with a week for two at the Jefferson Hotel in Washington DC and 7 nights at the world famous Top Royal Suite at the $650 million Burj-Al-Arab in Dubai, both with first class flights.

Thats not all though  you also get to experience a Virgin Galactic space flight, which alone costs around $250,000 (168,000). Once youre done with the travelling, you get not one but two cars; a not-so-exciting Toyota Prius and a Lamborghini Gallardo, Lamborghinis best selling car between 2003 and 2013. Dont worry, they also come with one years insurance and a one year Super Car Membership.

Once youre done driving around, you can go on a Spy training day, then onto a hostage rescue experience.

But wait, theres still more. You get to completely reinvent your look with plastic surgery and then get a personal shopper to buy you a whole new wardrobe to go with your new face. Of course, youd need somewhere to put all your nice new clothes, which is why they also throw in a capsule wardrobe to store it all in.

Oh, and you get a full-size replica Dubstep gun and Saints Row IV Commander in Chief Edition, of course.

Dying Light My Apocalypse collectors edition - 250k

The Dying Light My Apocalypse collectors edition is my favourite of the three, coming in at a cool 250,000. Along with x4 signed Steelbox editions of Dying Light with x2 Razer Tiamat headphones and a brand new Xbox One console to play it on, you get a whole host of other fun goodies.

The best part of the bundle? A Real life, life size custom built Dying Light Zombie Home by Tiger Log Cabins, the only company in the world that produces Zombie proof log cabins. It comes with an upper deck with 360-degree vantage point and escape hatch, reinforced slit windows, walls and doors and a barbed wire surround. It also has a toilet system, kitchen, living room with TV, xbox and sound system and a garden section to grow vegetables. Oh, and an arsenal storage unit for weaponry to, yknow, fight off the undead.

Did you see the cool Dying Light Parkour POV video before release? Ampisound, a company that specialises in parkour films, created it. One of the prizes is to go and meet the Ampisound team for them to give you some zombie avoidance parkour lessons so you can avoid the zombies like you do in Dying Light.

You also get a trip to Techland in Wroclaw in Poland where you get to meet the developers behind Dying Light and party with Steve the Zombie Consultant, of course. You then get your face skinned onto your Night Hunter character model so you can kill everyone as your zombie self. How cool is that? You also get to play Be The Zombie matches with the dev team, which is a great bragging opportunity  if you win.

Youre also supplied with a human sized volatile figurine and Dying Light branded night vision goggles, two important tools for pranking your friends.

GRID 2: Mono Edition - 125,000

The Grid 2: Mono Edition is nothing to be sniffed at, even if it is a bit old now. So what does 125,000 get you? Well the most impressive part of the Mono Edition is the trip to the BAC factory  why? The trip includes a factory tour and time with technicians to customise your own BAC Mono, making sure its size and spec is just right for you.

As well as your very own GRID 2 designed BAC Mono, youre supplied with a made to measure race suit and gloves, as well as a GRID 2: Mono Edition branded Bell Racing helmet to finish the look off.

You also get a copy of GRID 2 for PlayStation, which includes bespoke artwork, and a brand new Playstation 3 to play it on.

All in all, its not too bad for 125,000.