Tech Savvy Mag
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Summer Road Trip Hints and Tips by Scott Steinberg Life Looking to plan a summer vacation? We highly recommend taking road trips, as they can provide a great way to get out with the family and explore a new town or area of the country. Plenty are easy and fun to setup. However, youll want to make sure youre prepared before hitting the road. Weve teamed up with some great companies to help you do just that. For starters, youll want to make sure your vehicle is in tip-top shape. Oftentimes vehicle maintenance is pushed to the bottom of the to-do list, but its important to make sure your car is good to go before hitting the road. With 700 locations nationwide, Sears Auto Center has you covered. They have full-service and battery experts to help with any of your maintenance needs and super-reliable DieHard battery products keep you powered when you need it on the roadways. If you check out their website at Searsauto.com you can grab more info, including updates on all sorts of great deals like an oil change AND tire rotation for just 14.99 through July 26. After youve got the inside of your car covered, youll want to make sure youve got the outside covered as well. You can take care of your tires and trim with the new Turtle Wax Jet Black line of products like Endura-Shine Tire & Trim coatings feature exclusive breakthrough tint technology that restores finishes to their blackest black. The Jet Black line offers powerful UV protection against future fading, so you can maintain your cars sharp looks and luster. They have a great $7 mail-in rebate program going on right now through October, 31st so be sure to check out Turtlewax.com/jetblack. Also be sure to have a look at Delphi Connect, which is a great gadget that helps keep you connected while on a summer vacation road trip. Plug this into your car and download the app, and you can get vehicle diagnostics alerts so you know when your car is having issues. You can check things out before you hit the road and also monitor along the way. Plus, its a 4G LTE WiFi hotspot in your car for up to 5 devices so your kids can stay connected and entertained on those long rides. As you can see, its quick and simple to get yourself up to speed for any road trip, wherever your travels promise to take you this summer season. Happy trails!

Last-Minute High-Tech Holiday Gifts by Scott Steinberg Life One of the nice parts about shopping for last-minute holiday gifts this year is the wealth of high-tech options available for every age, interest and budget. In case you should find yourself sprinting to find the perfect present though, its not always easy to choose the best pick for friends and family, however. But fear not, help is at hand: Weve teamed up with several leading manufacturers to offer a few ideas that can save you time, effort and energy when it comes to gift-giving this season. For starters, if youre shopping for a home entertainment fan, check out the Samsung Shape Wireless Bluetooth Speaker. Its a sleek system that offers an attractive, eye-catching design and wireless entertainment throughout your whole house from a variety of music sources  for example, smartphones and tablets. It offers an awesome wireless experience, letting you listen to your entire music library, radio stations and music services on-demand via Bluetooth or WiFi. Easy plug-and-play setup also makes it simple to install so you can get right to rocking your own wireless surround sound system. If youre a big fan of streaming music, movies and video games though, its important to note: Your connected experience is only as good as the weakest link in your home network. With more and more devices connecting to home wireless networks at one time, response times can slow and frustration increase. Happily, you can help the whole family turbo-charge downloads and boost streaming capabilities with the Motorola-ARRIS SURFboard SBG6782-AC Gateway. Its a two in one modem and router that packs the latest technology and blazing speeds to allow everyone to use their gadgets happily. With so many devices in our home entertainment centers now, however, controlling them can get somewhat complicated. So if youre looking for a great gift for a DIYer guy that can help them control all their favorite gadgets, see the Logitech Harmony Ultimate as well. Its a universal remote that lets you control all your devices, from TVs to Blu-ray players, Philips Hue lights and even the new Xbox One, even through cabinets and walls. You can even create activities like watch a movie and watch as the Harmony Ultimate powers up your TV, receiver, Blu-ray player and dims those lights. If youre shopping for an iPhone 5 owner, have a look at Duracell Powermat products as well, which help increase battery life so youre never caught without power. Case in point: The Powerset II, the ultimate charging system for the iPhone 5. It includes an Access Case that offers wireless charging through snap-on, snap-off batteries that are easily installed and more than double your mobile devices battery life. It also includes a two-position mat so you can wirelessly charge two devices simultaneously. The Powerset II is on-sale through Christmas at AT&T Stores and DuracellPowermat.com as well  you can save $30, as the price has been reduced to just $99. Of course, if you find yourself struggling to come up with ideas, be sure to swing by your local neighborhood RadioShack as well. Theyve got tech experts on-hand who can help you pick from a wide range of last-minute tech gifts like the AUVIO Folding Headphones with Mic, among many great choices for the holidays. You might also consider grabbing a RadioShack gift card as well, as techies can always have fun picking out their favorite devices. Theres even a Holiday Cash promotion running where you can get $10 back off on a $5 purchase. As you can see, theres no shortage of great last-minute holiday gift options to be had, so youll never have a problem finding something to quickly stash in your bag as you head out to visit friends and loved ones, or under the tree. Happy holidays!