Hot Holiday Gifts 2014
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Its hard to believe, but the holidays are finally here! That means a wave of all-new holiday gifts have also arrived and (sweet!) will soon find their way into high-tech enthusiasts hands. But with so much great gear to sort through, how do you choose the right present for that special someone? Happily, weve teamed up with some top tech leaders to take a look at the latest and greatest new gift ideas youll want to consider.

For example: A new smartphone like the BlackBerry Passport, which is great for any mobile professional who wants to be more productive. Inspired by an actual passport, the mobile device has a large high-resolution touch square screen and the industrys first and only touch-enabled QWERTY keyboard  making it ideal for viewing documents, browsing the web and writing emails. It also has some great new features like a new operating system that offers greater security, dual app store with hundreds of thousand apps, BlackBerrys new digital assistant as well as BlackBerry Blend, which allows you to easily share content, texts and conversations from your device to your tablet or computer.

Another great gift option to consider would be a new computer. There are so many out there, but the HP Chromebook is well worth taking a look at because its affordable and powerful. It comes with 100 GB of Google Drive storage for two years, which is great for storing all your holiday photos. Plus it has Google Chromecast and access to third party apps like Hulu and Netflix, a feature anyone on your shopping list will love!

Also keep an eye out for the Lyve Home 2TeraByte drive that stores all of your photos and videos from all devices  phones, laptops, external drives, and it organizes them into one central library creating a secure backup of all of your images. Theres also a great Free Lyve app that gives you instant access to any of these photos and videos from any device, no matter where you are. Its super easy  just download the Lyve app from itunes or googleplay on all of your devices, and it does the rest  it even backs up any new photos instantly!

One gift guys can always use too is grooming tools, and Wahl is definitely the way to go. Their latest and greatest are the Lithium Ion Trimmer and Elite Pro Series Clipper. They cover it all, from head and face. Both feature patented ground blades for a smooth and even cut every time. A lot of guys are can be very particular about grooming tools, but guys will definitely want to have a look at theseand theyre sold at major stores nationwide for under $70.

If youre trying to get as much done in one place as possible you might also shop at GameStopits a great place to find all your gaming and tech gifts this season. They have great deals on new and pre-owned gifts like video games, consoles, gadgets, and accessories. This year among their hot deals is the Xbox Onetheyre offering the system in a bundle with digital copies of two Assassins Creed games. What guy wouldnt be happy with a new gaming system?