Best Travel Apps of All Time for Business Trips, Vacations
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Oh how we love technology! Thanks to the efficiencies smartphones, tablets and other devices offer, business travel has never been more seamless for todays working professional  especially during peak vacation season when your mind may be traveling to things outside of work. Just recently when we were on business in Chicago, for example, I stayed at the Hyatt Place Chicago/River North and experienced their high-tech hotel rooms. It just took a quick recharge on a nearby USB port, connection to the free Wi-Fi network and tap of a finger to quickly access files. Today its unbelievably easy to stay up-to-date and in touch!

As the Hyatt Place Seamless Travel Series Tech-spert, I was recently asked what are the best apps to help you travel more smoothly during a Twitter party with #TravelSkills. With hundreds of free or cost-affordable apps available for download now, you can almost manage the whole travel process from your phone. From booking your hotel room and dinner reservations to your scheduling your next flight and car service pickup, its important to know the best ones to utilize. For your convenience and entertainment, here are some of my favorite travel apps of all time, designed to help road warriors make the most of every trip:

Worldmate

www.worldmate.com

No matter how complex your travel itinerary gets, you can easily manage it with this tool from most smartphones and tablets. You can track and organize your flight schedules, hotel bookings and car reservations, or pull up weather forecasts, maps and more. For business travelers, you can even use it to juggle appointments, so you dont end up at showing up at the right time at the wrong clients office.

Evernote

www.evernote.com

Need to create a to-do list, share audio clips and images, or simply want to clip and save an interesting article you spotted for reading later? Try Evernote, an online organization app that lets you save notes, files, images, and websites youve bookmarked, then synchronize them across devices and access the information from anywhere. Among the best ways to keep current projects, it plays the role of virtual assistant, helping you cut through the clutter and more effectively manage your digital life.

Hyatt Hotels

www.hyatthotels.hyatt.com/mobile

Hunting for a hotel while on the road? Hyatts multilingual mobile app for Android and iPhone devices lets you book stays at hundreds of Hyatt hotels, including my personal favorite  Hyatt Place, which offers free Wi-Fi, USB recharging stations and a comfy work areas in roomy rooms specifically designed for business travelers. You can also manage reservations right from the app and access local maps or driving directions, and you can even handle check-ins and checkouts right from your pocket.

Dragon Dictation

www.nuance.com

Great for getting work done while sprinting between appointments, this handy speech recognition app translates your voice into text, so you can speak your texts or emails for later use in seconds. This is also a handy way to get ideas and thoughts down on virtual paper. The next time youre sitting at the airport and inspiration strikes, try rattling it off before you forget  you may be surprised at how brilliant a solution youve come up with later.

Snap One

www.snapone.com

If youre a working parent, you know how difficult it can be to stay on top of everyones schedule, especially while traveling. Snap Ones suite of cloud (online) apps helps solve the problem by letting you securely and privately share contacts and calendars with your family, as well as bring your files, photos, videos and documents wherever you travel. You can essentially bring your desktop along on any trip and send snapshots and videos to family back home.

TOTALe

www.totale.rosettastone.com

Need to pickup a few common phrases for a trip overseas (Wheres the bathroom? orWhere can I find the best local restaurant?)? Rosetta Stones travel-friendly app helps you brush up on various languages to easily translate dialogue or practice your pronunciation. Theres also a desktop version that offers live chats and group activities so you can quickly go from flustered to fluent.

Skype

www.skype.com

Numerous apps from FaceTime to Google Hangouts make it possible to easily videoconference with clients and colleaguesfrom a variety of gadgets. But Skype remains among the most widely popular solutions for mobile meetings or phoning back home to say helloin realtime. Suitable for both personal and professional use, it provides a free and seamless solution for video chats, so you can enjoy some face-to-face time with clients and coworkers, and  wherever you travel  be there to tuck your kids in and say goodnight.

This post was sponsored by Hyatt Place as part of its Seamless Travel Series. The opinions are my own and based on my experience.