Family Cloud Computing Tips: 5 Ways to Get Connected
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Family Tech Technology for parents & kids: Hints, tips, online safety strategies & more.

Adapt to survive and thrive! Thats the motto of todays tech-centric world, and families can heed that advice by taking advantage of the latest digital solutions available. After all, technology hasnt just transformed the way we communicate, educate and entertain ourselves. Its also opened up a world of connectivity and convenience for todays family.

Luckily for those managing a modern household (wait: when did the four year-old learn to use our smartphone?), balancing both real and digital life doesnt have to be difficult either. All you have to do is tap into the power of the cloud  a.k.a. online services and solutions  to stay on top of your day and everyones schedule.

Case in point: A variety of new high-tech tools make it easy to connect the pixilated dots by putting everything you need, from photos to calendars and phone numbers, in one place and synchronizing data across all of your familys devices. Using these cloud services  accessible from virtually any Internet-connected gadget  you can easily login and share contacts and calendars with loved ones, or access songs, snapshots or videos nearly anytime, anywhere. But the beauty here isnt just the ability to keep everyone on the same page, or easily share all your favorite stuff with friends and family. Its that you can use cloud services in unexpected ways to keep in touch with loved ones, and keep up with lifes thrilling twists and turns. In essence, wherever you travel, your family travels with you  and so does all of your favorite stuff.

What makes these online software applications so handy, especially for those of us on the go, isnt just their versatility. (You can securely store and pull down everything from chart-topping tunes to book reports to home videos from Internet-connected devices on-demand.) Its the fact that as a parent, you can also backup everything in one secure spot where its easy to grab and share, and manage and monitor family life online.

For example, Snap One provides a handy method for sharing contacts and calendars or storing all of the stuff that matters most to you online, so you can easily grab it as needed or get it back if lost. The cloud services apps also provide a helpful way to stay on top of kids comings and goings, protect your familys privacy, and enjoy greater peace of mind.

Looking to provide your family with a convenient way to stay organized, safe, and stay up to date? Maybe its time you put your head in the cloud. Here are a few handy tips that can help you start putting the best that this technology has to offer to work for you and your children- and putting your increasingly hectic schedule back together.

Store More

Want to put all of your favorite files at your fingertips wherever you travel, so no one accidentally leaves homework lying around, misplaces the babysitters phone number, or forgets to bring grandma those photos she keeps asking for? Cloud storage solutions (which can archive data online so its accessible anytime, anywhere) make it easy to take contacts, calendars and files wherever you go. Back-up your data to the cloud and not only are secure copies readily available to be enjoyed and shared with friends and family on-demand, theyre also available to berestored in minutes if data should ever get corrupted, or should you ever lose your smartphone or tablet. Inside tip: setting devices to automatically back-up information, especially at times when youre not using them (e.g. overnight), can help ensure that your data is always up-to-date, and that its always nestled safely in the cloud. Oh, and if youre headed somewhere sunny this Spring? For fun, try setting up your devices to send vacation snapshots up to an online private area that you can share with friends and family, so they can keep up with all your travels.

Get it Together

The average high-tech household owns nearlya dozen different devices  and were all using an increasing variety of mobile and desktop solutions to connect. To stay organized and on top of your digital life, consider using a cloud solution, which can unite your familys favorite files and information in one handy spot. (And that are easily visited whether youre using a tablet, PC, Mac, iPhone, or Android or Windows Phone device.) That way, you can synchronize contacts, calendars and files across a full range of gadgets, and provide your family with access to all of your favorite photos, songs and videos in one convenient online hub.

A great way to start Spring-cleaning this season: Organize documents, photos, phone numbers and more online, then watch as clutter quickly clears across your familys full range of devices. If youre a parent, youll especially want to consider personal clouds, e.g. those Snap One provides, designed specifically for families.

To get more from solutions like these, try using them not just to manage your familys data, but also track kids real-world comings and goings, and/or browsing habits.

Connect Safely

As increasingly mobile and connected as todays kids are, many parents are looking to technology to provide greater peace of mind. Be sure to take advantage of the parental controls built into Internet-connected devices and operating systemsto keep tabs on kids online activity, filter out inappropriate content, and block unwanted calls. Naturally, youll also find them built into many popular cloud applications as well. These tools can help you keep track of where kids are at in real-life, and where theyre hanging out online, without having to helicopter over them.

Using the parental controls built into family-oriented cloud solutions like Snap Secure (which offers many handy safeguards) doesnt just provide the ability to monitor call and text history, track Internet browsing and block specific phone numbers either. It also allows you to pinpoint your childrens location at any given moment, receive alerts when kids step out of preset safety zones, and setup quick response calls in case theres an emergency. Spring break is a fun time, but if youre a parent, it pays to make sure your kids are enjoying theyre time in Orlando as agreed, not Cancun.

Disinfect Yourself

Viruses and malware are among todays fastest-growing online threats on mobile and desktop devices and are a huge concern for Android users in particular. Actively guard against them by being careful about what you click on, which sites you browse, and not opening attachments from unknown or unexpected sources. Worried that a pesky infection may be going around? Be sure to setup automatic antivirus software scans  and to keep your software safeguards up to date on the latest updates (i.e. defenses). Cloud solutions such as SnapSecure, which employs the #1 ranked Bitdefender antivirus solution, help provide a further line of defense, letting you remotely schedule virus scans from your smartphone, or even wipe data from lost devices.

Of course, its also important to keep your personal information private. Always be careful of what you share with others online, and dont assume privacy settings are set by default. The nice part about personal clouds, which we discussed earlier: you can quickly and easily set them up to provide access to those you trust  and prevent access by those you dont.

Rock On

To get the most from the cloud, dont forget to enjoy the freedom (and fun) it brings. Clearly, online apps can help us be safer and more productive, but did you know that these solutions can also entertain (and soothe the savage toddler) as well? Just one example: Using streaming media solutions such as Snap Play, which let you store and access your music library or enjoy custom playlists from virtually anywhere, its easy to bring the party with you wherever you go. (You can even listen to all your iTunes music on an Android device.) Put your favorite albums and songs in the cloud, and not only can you save storage space on your computer or smartphone,you can beam your favorite tunes down on-demand, and enjoy them whenever, wherever, no matter if youre at a picnic or out for a afternoon jog. Plus, theres always the added bonus of being able to pull up a movie for Mom and Dad as needed  or a cartoon, if a little peace and quiet is even more needed instead.

As you can see, cloud services provide a great complement to the technology and devices you already know and love. So why worry about whose turn it is to pick up the kids (you did remember to get them from school today, right?), when you can put all your familys calendars, contacts and most important files just a click or tap away?

Get the whole family connected on a cloud solution to stay connected, organized and safe!