Best New Tablet PCs and Computers 2013: Apple, Samsung and More
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Small Business Expert Essential hints, tips & business advice for startups & entrepreneurs.

Are you looking to upgrade your tablet over the coming year? Or maybe 2013 will be the year that marks the purchase of your first tablet. Either way, the bustling tablet market has you covered: There are more models to select from than ever before, and theyre all available in a multitude of colors, sizes, and price brackets. And between iOS, Windows, and Android, you even have your choice of operating systems.

Stumped on what you ought to buy? Here are the top ten tablets for 2013.

iPad (Fourth Generation)  The iPad is still the go-to brand for tablet computers. The highly popular device is now into its fourth iteration and boasts powerful hardware, a familiar interface, and tons of game and app support courtesy of the App Store.

iPad Mini  Apples trimmed-down answer to the 7 tablet craze is approximately as powerful as the iPad 2, and for the most part it supports the same apps and games as its larger cousins.

Nexus 7  Looking for an Android-based tablet thats affordable and versatile? This little fellow from Google and Asus might be your answer. Its perfect for reading eBooks and watching television programs, and itll only set you back $299 USD.

Microsoft Surface  This laptop/tablet hybrid is the perfect buy for anyone who wants the portability of a tablet, but the accuracy of a keyboard. Its detachable keyboard doubles as a protective cover, and there are two versions to choose from: A model that comes with Windows RT, and a model that includes Windows 8 Pro.

Motorola Droid Xyboard / Xoom 2  The Xyboard is smaller, sleeker, and faster than its predecessor, Xoom. The media edition of the tablet can stream content from your PC, and the whole package has been made water-resistant. Perfect for bad weather, though we dont recommend taking it for a dunk in the pool.

Sony Xperia Tablet S  The Xperia Tablet S is the successor to the Sony Tablet S. It has a thinner, lighter design than its ancestor, and an improved camera. Its even equipped with an infrared blaster, which lets you use the device as a universal remote.

Asus eee Pad Transformer Prime  Arguably the coolest-named tablet in the world, the Asus eee Transformer Prime actually does transform from a tablet to a more complete laptop. All you need to do is pick up the Primes optional docking keyboard for a little QWERTY power.

Samsung Galaxy Tab 2 10.1  Samsungs popular tablet runs Android 4.0 Ice Cream Sandwich. Delicious, but what does it mean for you? It means tons of processing power that blasts through work during the day, and deliver gentle stories at night. Between books, pictures, movies, and video, the Galaxy Tab 2 10.1 is a perfect family media hub.

Kindle Fire HD  The Kindle Fire HD is the color-screen follow-up to Amazons enormously popular Kindle line of book readers. It runs on a modified version of Ice Cream Sandwich, and is capable of playing video, movies, and games. Needless to say, you can also read ebooks off it. All yours for a still-affordable $199 USD.

Blackberry Playbook  The Blackberry Playbook may not have set the world on fire upon its initial release, but price cuts have made it more attractive. You can use the Playbook to make and record videos, play games, and much more. Interestingly, the Playbook is pre-loaded with an app that grants access to over 1,500 films from the National Film Board of Canada, which makes the device worth the price of admission for nostalgic Canadians.