Online Job Hunting Guide: 5 Hints and Tips to Get Hired
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Small Business Expert Essential hints, tips & business advice for startups & entrepreneurs.

Finding a job is no longer just about printing out reams of paper, dropping them in a mailbox, and then crossing your fingers. There are dozens of ways to successfully find a career, and taking your hunt online can yield big success. Countless job sites exist to help you showcase your Resume, and hundreds of Internet communities can offer up tons of online job hunting tips, guides and expert advice.

Dont feel intimidated, though. A lot of the advice thats available can be condensed into a handful of rules that are easy to remember, and even easier to execute. Heres what you should keep in mind while youre conducting your own online job hunt, all of which can help you get hired:

Write a customized cover letterand then follow up  The Internet has made job hunting more convenient, but its also made it far easier for companies to get spammed with resumes from hundreds of thousands of hopeful job seekers. Thats why its important to stand out, and one of the best ways to do so is to tailor your cover letter (and even your resume) so that it speaks specifically to the company youre applying at. Of course, a customized cover letter takes extra effort, but its better to send out fewer personalized cover letters than dump a stack of sterile Resumes and cover letter templates on hapless recruiters. Once youve applied, follow up with an email, or, better yet, a phone call in approximately a week. If youre lucky enough to get an interview, send a Thank You email when you get home later that night.

Tailor your Resume to utilize keywords  Recruiters use keywords to sort through the mountain of resumes that inevitably end up at their doorstep. If a resume doesnt have any of the job-specific keywords theyre looking for, its likely to wind up in the trash. SquawkFox has a great breakdown of some of the keywords that will help your resume bob up for air in the swamp.

Dig deep on job sites for older postings  Same as were always looking for jobs, employers are always looking for employees. Some job hunters make the mistake of going back a mere few days on job postings, which means a lot of great prospects get buried in the avalanche. Take the time to really look at whats available. Even a job that was posted a few weeks ago stands a good chance of still being open.

Watch out for scams  Seems like common sense, but watch yourself: the economy is in rough shape, and scammers know it. Theyve tailored their pitches to target desperate job seekers with promises of how you can  Work from Home!! and Make $5000 in one week!!! Though it is possible to work lucrative jobs from home, if a listing sounds too good to be true, it almost certainly is. Always Google an organization before applying, and it goes without saying that you should never submit credit card information or your social security number to any job listing that asks for it.

Use Twitter and other social media in your search  A lot of companies are learning the value of Twitter in the search for employees. Follow companies Twitter accounts (and Facebook pages), as well as Twitter accounts that are dedicated to posting job listings in your field.

Our very own Scott Steinberg has put together a guide to online job hunting for NBCs Life Goes Strong network as well, which offers additional hints, tips and expert advice  including several ways to use personal branding techniques to get hired  for your search. You can view it here  happy hunting!

For more online job hunting tips, check out:

Job Hunting at About.com

9 Tips for Better Job Hunting at CareerBuilder.com

Strategies for Finding a Job Online at DigitalTrends.com

[Image Source]