Staying Entertained on the Road
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
With summer in full swing, its the perfect time to kick back, relax and enjoy some high-tech gadget entertainment thanks to devices like smartphones, tablets and portable video game systems. Hotels, like Hyatt Place hotels, are helping make stays more enjoyable for modern travelers and families with amenities like free in-room Wi-Fi and ample USB ports as well. Put the two together, and youll discover that downloading and enjoying music, movies and on-demand shows is more seamless and simpler than ever.

As a response to the requests we received through the Hyatt Place Seamless Travel Series, Ive developed a list of the of the latest and greatest gadgets to keep you busy on the road, and keep the fun chugging merrily along, whether youre cruising to your next destination via plane, train or automobile.

Lenovo IdeaPad A10

www.lenovo.com

Many tablet PCs offer vibrant HD screens, hyper-intuitive user interfaces and enough computing horsepower to play just about any clever new app you could imagine. But this affordable Android model also offers something that many value-priced rivals dont: Dolby stereo speakers that make music sound more warm and vivid than anything youd expect to hear from such a compact and lightweight carry-on. If youre an audiophile, be sure to check it out. One listen is all it takes to hear the difference.

PS Vita

www.playstation.com

Players of all ages can enjoy video games on laptops, tablets and smartphones of every kind. But this supercharged handheldunit is the closest you can come to experiencing the power of your favorite set-top device to go without packing a PlayStation 4 along. Connect to the free in-room Wi-Fi available at hotels like Hyatt Place, and you can even seamlessly access favorite Internet and social media services such as YouTube and Facebook, or stream movies from Netflix. With hundreds of software titles available from a colorful puzzler to a soccer simulator, youll find plenty of great excuses to keep those thumbs moving.

Garmin Forerunner 15

www.garmin.com

Stepping out for an occasional jog is a great way to sightsee, better get to know the places you visit and stay fit while on the road. Strap on this connected sports watch, which tracks the number of steps you take and how far you travel each day, and youll have plenty of incentive to hit the ground running. Capable ofhelping you set daily activity goals, and plot workout plans accordingly, just give it a quick charge from one of your hotel rooms USB ports, slap it onto your wrist and off you go. Literally.

Samsung ATIV Book 9

www.samsung.com

Want to stay in for the night and curl up with a great flick, or browse the best that the Internet has to offer? This slim and stylish all-purpose ultrabook, which combines the best features of tablet PCs and notebook computers, is just the ticket. Boasting a sporty HD touchscreen, and easily connected to free Wi-Fi so you can access streaming movie and music services, it also offers speedy Web surfing capabilities. Pack it along on your travels, and you can enjoy a convenient solution for staying productive and entertained on the road for hours on end thanks to the systems considerable battery life.

DC Comics

www.dccomics.com

From Batman to Wonder Woman, all it takes is a tap to make dozens of classic superheroes spring to life on your Apple or Android device. Just load up this nifty app, choose a comic to purchase and read, and youre set for the better part of any flight. All sorts of favorite titles are available for browsing, including all-star turns by caped crusaders like Superman, the Justice League and Green Lantern, and parsing each issue isa breeze since you can swipe between pages and panels in seconds. In short, its like having an entire comics shop right there along with you in your backpack.

Olympus Stylus Tough TG-850

www.getolympus.com

Why settle for any old digital camera when you can grab one thats waterproof, freeze-proof, shockproof, and otherwise ruggedized to withstand just about any other form of extreme travel you can throw at it? A novel tilting LCD screen also provides entirely new perspective on shots, so you can climb up on rocks or submerge the device in water, as well as snap one of a kind images from a number of eye-opening angles. Vacationerswill especially appreciate this surprisingly cost-conscious cameras high-speed capture capabilities and wide-angle lens, great for grabbing shots of national parks or squealing toddlers sprinting by after downing a popsicle or five.

This post was sponsored by Hyatt Place as part of its Seamless Travel Series. The opinions are my own and based on my experience.