Business Trends 2013: Technology, Cloud, Mobile and More
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Small Business Expert Essential hints, tips & business advice for startups & entrepreneurs.

Technology usually makes its way to our workplaces long before it comes home. Thats because so much tech is engineered with the idea of getting things done more quickly, more efficiently, and with less stress to the user. Neither every idea nor every new gadget that comes to the workplace or any place of business sticks around forever, but when we look at 2012s big trends, we can get a rough idea of whats going to be big through 2013.

Here are 5 predictions about 2013s business trends.

More competition between mobile phones  The mobile market is crowded, and its only going to get more packed as the year goes on. The iPhone will remain a household name, but its already being pushed around in a big way by phones that run Android, including the Samsung Galaxy S III. We can expect more competitive pricing as a result.

Lots more competition between tablet computers  While smartphone competition looks to be hot through 2013, the tablet market will get outright fierce, particularly between 7 models. The iPad Mini should be a popular choice, though the Google Nexus 7s attractive price certainly wont go unnoticed by people looking to perform a little portable computing.

More use of the cloud  Hard drives and other physical storage mediums will continue to give way in favor of the convenience of cloud storage. The rise of tablets combined with usage of the cloud will see more employees working on the go as opposed to being chained to a desk and a PC.

More businesses implementing Wi-Fi Hotspots  More and more businesses, particularly retail and dining establishments, will offer free Wi-Fi to keep customers inside their walls. McDonalds and Starbucks have already done so with great success.

Long-term switch to HTML 5 and web apps  Over 2013, the popularity and usage of native apps will fade in favor of web-based apps running HTML 5. Apps certainly wont disappear tomorrow, but consumers and users will find themselves directed to the web more and more often.

For more 2013 business trends, take a look at Gartner Incs 2013 trends.