Summer Road Trips Hints and Tips: Gadgets and Gear
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Looking to plan a summer vacation? We highly recommend taking road trips, as they can provide a great way to get out with the family and explore a new town or area of the country. Plenty are easy and fun to setup. However, youll want to make sure youre prepared before hitting the road. Weve teamed up with some great companies to help you do just that.

For starters, youll want to make sure your vehicle is in tip-top shape. Oftentimes vehicle maintenance is pushed to the bottom of the to-do list, but its important to make sure your car is good to go before hitting the road. With 700 locations nationwide, Sears Auto Center has you covered. They have full-service and battery experts to help with any of your maintenance needs and super-reliable DieHard battery products keep you powered when you need it on the roadways. If you check out their website at Searsauto.com you can grab more info, including updates on all sorts of great deals like an oil change AND tire rotation for just 14.99 through July 26.

After youve got the inside of your car covered, youll want to make sure youve got the outside covered as well. You can take care of your tires and trim with the new Turtle Wax Jet Black line of products like Endura-Shine Tire & Trim coatings feature exclusive breakthrough tint technology that restores finishes to their blackest black. The Jet Black line offers powerful UV protection against future fading, so you can maintain your cars sharp looks and luster. They have a great $7 mail-in rebate program going on right now through October, 31st so be sure to check out Turtlewax.com/jetblack.

Also be sure to have a look at Delphi Connect, which is a great gadget that helps keep you connected while on a summer vacation road trip. Plug this into your car and download the app, and you can get vehicle diagnostics alerts so you know when your car is having issues. You can check things out before you hit the road and also monitor along the way. Plus, its a 4G LTE WiFi hotspot in your car for up to 5 devices so your kids can stay connected and entertained on those long rides.

As you can see, its quick and simple to get yourself up to speed for any road trip, wherever your travels promise to take you this summer season. Happy trails!