2016 Honda Civic coupe and sedan
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The production version of the Civic coupe has an toned down style compared to the Concept shown in New York

Honda revealed the first preview of its 2016 Honda Civic in concept form at the New York International Auto Show last month but these new pictures show the car as it will look in showroom form when its officially released towards the end of the year.

The firms Kermit-green "Civic Concept" previewed the coupe version of the new Civic, which will run on an all-new platform that will underpin all versions of the car worldwide. The new pictures  which come from official patents filed by Honda over the cars design  show that the production version will share the same metalwork, with the style toned down thanks to the removal of the concepts deep front and rear air dams, rear spoiler, oversized wheels and tiny side mirrors. The images also show that the final cars headlights will be slightly less futuristic than the concepts all-LED versions.

Despite the tamer appearance, other key details including the concept cars full-width rear light arrangement, have been retained for the production version. No doubt sportier versions of the car will come even closer to the concepts overall appearance.

Hondas patents also cover the sedan version of the Civic, which retains a coupe-style sloping rear roofline but adds a pair of rear doors and a redesigned rear section for added space and practicality. Overall, the sedans shape is noticeably similar to the "Concept B" show car (below) revealed at the Beijing Motor Show a year ago. Both the coupe and sedan share the same nose and windscreen, with the rear two-thirds of the cars differing to suit their intended purposes.

The new Civic coupe and sedan models represent the first of the all-new, 10th-generation cars to carry the Civic name, and they will be joined by a five-door hatchback in due course. In the meantime the five-door hatch version of the existing 9th generation machine looks likely to soldier on for a little longer, with the high performance, 306 bhp, 168 mph Type R version due to go on sale imminently.

Although technical details have yet to be announced, the 10th-gen Civics are expected to use 2.0l normally-aspirated four-cylinder engines and 1.5l turbocharged fours, all with Hondas VTEC variable valve timing and lift system.

Share