Highlights from Milan Design Week 2015
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The Salone del Mobile 2015 has once again lived up to its reputation of being one of the greatest furnishing and design fairs in the world. Gizmag got the chance to explore some of the new furniture collections which not only filled the Rho Fairgrounds, but also took over the city of Milan. Here's a summary of some of the new designs which grabbed our attention at this year's event.

Slim lines, muted colors and the use of natural materials seemed to be the common theme among the exhibitors this year. Simplicity, Northern European minimalism and a return to 70s and 80s themes also featured among some of the more renowned brands. There was a strong focus on compact and modular furnishings, which stood out in contrast to the more grand collections that are only suitable for large expansive spaces.

Space-saving designs were some of our favorite picks, which included transforming living spaces and multifunctional pieces by Italian companies Campeggi and Clei.

"Research and development, innovation, patented technology and a creative spirit is what transforms a dwelling into an intelligent home," says Clei. "The versatility of the transformable systems allows us to create multifunctional solutions with a high aesthetic value."

Italian manufacturer Cappellini focused its attention on unique production techniques for each individual product, placing an emphasis on craftsmanship as opposed to mass industrial processes.

New to the FuoriSalone circuit, Vado Libero got creative with innovative furniture pieces that are designed to compliment a cycling lifestyle. Its easy-to-use furniture modules not only make storing a bike and its accessories easier, but also offers an aesthetic which transforms your bike into an interior show piece.

Peugeot presented its bold idea for a modern food truck, which opens up to expand twice its width. The concept is designed to offer an instant street restaurant, complete with kitchen, food storage, cooling facilities, bar counter and even a DJ booth. Conceptualized and designed by Peugeot Design Lab, the Peugeot Food-truck complies with commercial food preparation standards and comes equipped with professional-grade preparation and cooking appliances.

Interni's exhibition entitled "Energy for Creativity" took over the grounds of the University of Milan, featuring installations from architects adopting some of the themes linked to Expo Milano 2015, which opens next month. Kengo Kuma and Associates presented its "Kitchenhouse" featuring an impressive pavilion made from bamboo and steel. Inside the pavilion, Kuma presented a unique installation exploring the evolution of the Japanese kitchen.

Polish-American architect Daniel Libeskind presented his "Future Flowers" exhibit made from two kilometers (1.2 miles) of red steel panels. The 3-dimensional geometric installation filled one of the university's interior courtyards and was an impressive feature to look at from all angles.

These are just an handful of the highlights of this year's Milan Design Week and we've put together a special photo gallery of what we think were some of the more unique and cutting edge furniture designs.

For more info on the show, visit Salone Internazionale del Mobile.

Share