IMF Ready to Lead Nepal Quake Relief as World Offers Help
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The International Monetary Fund said its ready to send a team to assess Nepals financing needs as governments, private companies and humanitarian groups rushed to provide aid following its worst earthquake in eight decades.

IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde expressed deepest sympathies to the people of Nepal and said in a statement shed coordinate with the World Bank, Asian Development Bank and other agencies to provide help. More than 2,200 are confirmed dead in Saturdays 7.8-magnitude quake. A fresh 6.7 magnitude aftershock on Sunday hampered efforts to find survivors and reach relief to the affected.

The toll is expected to rise as teams dig through the ruins of collapsed buildings strewn across Nepal, one of Asias poorest countries with an economy thats smaller than all 50 U.S. states. Critical infrastructure, from mobile phone towers to water purification systems, was interrupted or destroyed.

Major aid groups including Oxfam, Save the Children and Unicef quickly refreshed their websites with emergency appeals for donations. Images of destruction circulated on social media, including under the Twitter hashtag #NepalEarthquake, showing massive piles of rubble and tents springing up in the countrys historic capital city, whose origins date back almost 2,000 years.

Google Support

An initial pledge of $1 million in humanitarian assistance from the U.S. government was equaled by technology giant Google Inc., which had one executive killed in a landslide on Mount Everest and was scrambling to bring home three other employees. Some 22 climbers died in avalanches triggered by the temblor through Mount Everest, the worlds tallest peak, the Press Trust of India reported.

The U.S. Agency for International Development is deploying a disaster assistance response team and urban search and rescue efforts, Secretary of State John Kerry said in a statement. The World Health Organization supplied health kits to meet medical needs of 40,000 people for three months and $175,000 dollars as the first tranche of emergency financial aid, it said in an e-mailed statement.

The Chinese government is mobilizing emergency relief supplies to be delivered soon to the disaster-hit area in Nepal, Foreign Ministry spokesperson Hong Lei said in a statement posted on the ministrys website.

Modi Pledge

The first response came from neighboring India. Prime Minister Narendra Modi pledged aid and sought to provide relief for citizens in northern India who also were affected by the temblor. Several Indian Air Force helicopters and planes were assisting in relief and rescue operations in the worst affected areas in Nepal, Sitanshu Kar, a spokesman for the Defence Ministry said on Twitter.

More than 60 people died and several others were injured in India, the National Disaster Response Force said in e-mailed statement on Sunday. The death toll is likely to rise, it said.

The earthquake caused major damage in densely populated parts of the Himalayan nation and shook buildings in India, Tibet and Bangladesh. In a country with a per-capita annual income of about $750, or about $62.50 per month, high and humble Nepalis alike coped with the quakes aftermath.

The disaster prompted condolences and promises of aid from world leaders.

U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron described the deaths as shocking news in a Twitter post. The U.K. will do all we can to help those caught up in it, he said.

Germany, Pakistan

Germany stands ready to help in whatever way it can once it becomes clear what support Nepalese authorities need, German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said in an e-mail.

Singapore will send a 55-man search-and-rescue team to Nepal and some officers from the countrys police force, including officers from its Gurkha contingent, several of whom come from the affected Nepalese regions, a spokesman for the nations Ministry of Foreign Affairs said.

Pakistan dispatched two aircrafts to Nepal with doctors, rescue and relief experts, food and medical supplies, the foreign ministry said in a statement. Two more planes with relief assistance will reach Kathmandu on April 27, it said.

Israel, meanwhile, sent an advance search and rescue team by plane with emergency medical supplies early Sunday local time, and planned to fly out a number of citizens stranded in the country.

Aid groups emphasized their crisis management experience and presence on the ground in appealing for funds.

Unicef has prepositioned supplies, including water purification tablets, hygiene kits, tarpaulins and nutrition supplies, and is working with government and other partners to meet childrens immediate needs in the areas of water and sanitation, child protection, health and nutrition, said the UNs childrens relief fund.