How Safe Investments Could Destroy Your Portfolio
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
If you want a consistent stream ofincome when you retire, youve probably heard about a few familiar investment strategies. A dividend-paying stockgets you a regular cash payout from a company while letting you participate in the stock markets upside. Municipal bonds are safely backed by governments, and their income usually isnt taxable.

But after years of low interest rates and rising stock markets, these once-conservative strategies might actuallybe putting investors in risky situations. Heres where these income investors are going wrong:

When online investment firm SigFig analyzed 300,000 investors portfolios, it found that people who are focused on income rather than growth are getting most of thatincome from just a few sources. Of income investors over the age of40, 52percent aregetting their income entirely fromthree or fewer dividend-paying stocks. Thirty-one percent are relying on onlyone dividend-paying stock.

Being so concentrated in a few income-generating stocks is dangerous, says Jason Hsu, co-founder and vice chairman of Research Affiliates. With only a few stocks, investors are violating an important rule of investing: Spread money around to lower the risk of big losses and make ones portfolio less volatile.Advisers typically put clients in funds owning hundreds of stocks and bonds in a variety of categories. SigFig in October created a diversified income portfolio that produces income from eight different exchange-traded funds, or ETFs, with exposure to U.S. and international stocks, U.S. preferred stocks,and five types of bonds.

With interest rates so low, many older investors are desperate for income. Some brokers are taking advantage of that desperationto sell investors productsthat are expensive,overly complicated, and wrong for their particular situations. Thats the conclusion of a new report from the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority. Regulators found that broker-dealers may be recommending unsuitable transactions that seniors dont understand. The most worrisome investments were in structured products, nontraded real estate investment trusts, variable annuities, and alternative investments including leverage-inverse ETFs. Investors, some over age 90, found their money locked up in these highly risky investments. They also endedup paying big fees, which ate upany income the products might have yielded.

Pinning your retirement on just a few companies is risky enough. But the current state of the stock market adds to the risks: By historical valuation standards, U.S. stocks that pay a dividend are looking expensive, Hsu says.The Dow Jones U.S. Dividend 100 Index is up 181 percent over the past six years. Those prices reflect high expectations that could be dashed if profits or the economy stumble. If peopleare willing to invest incompanies based outside the U.S., Hsu says, they can find companies paying healthy dividends at more reasonable valuations.

Municipal bonds debt backed by cities, states, and other local governments have also had a great run lately, with the S&P Municipal Bond Index returning 5.8 percent inthe past year. Muni bonds can be tax-free, and thats made them popular after recent tax increases on wealthy Americans, says Marilyn Cohen, president and chief executive officer of Envision Capital Management. While Cohen thinks munis willkeep doing well, she says investors need to diversify, spreading their exposure over bonds with shorter durations.

Unfortunately, investors are drawn to the riskiest bonds because they also offer the biggest payouts. The riskiest muni bonds, for example, are issued by governments with fiscal trouble, including Chicago, Puerto Rico, and New Jersey, Cohen says. You can tiptoe around those land mines.

High-yielding stocks, which Hsu calls junk stocks, have the same risks. Dividend payouts at troubled companies may look generous, but theres a good chance those companies wont be able to keep paying them. Youre picking up a lot of risk, Hsu says.

Income investors may not be able to avoid risk entirely. With stocks at record highs and interest rates at record lows, its harder and harderto find an income thats perfectly safe. To get the income they need, investors need toprotect themselves by spreading their assets among as many income-producing investments as possible. And they should beware of any investment that promises a big payout its almost certainly too good to be true.