Christies Wife Quits as Managing Director at Angelo, Gordon
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Mary Pat Christie, the wife of potential presidential candidate Chris Christie, resigned as a managing director at Angelo, Gordon & Co.

Mrs. Christie has decided to take a hiatus from her work in the finance world to spend more time with her family and young children, Kevin Roberts, a spokesman for the second-term New Jersey governor, said in an e-mail Friday.

The governor has said he would announce in May or June whether he plans to join the crowded field of Republicans seeking the nomination. His wife, who accompanied him this month to early-voting New Hampshire, has been the family breadwinner, and her wages from the New York investment firm accounted for most of the $700,000 of earnings reported in their 2013 tax return. Christie, 52, makes $175,000 as governor.

It just reinforces the widely held belief that the governor is running for president, said Ben Dworkin, director of the Rebovich Institute for New Jersey Politics at Rider University in Lawrenceville. Running for president in the 21st century is not just a full-time job for the candidate but for the family as well.

Dworkin said Mary Pat Christies departure could dispel any perception of impropriety or ties between Christie and the firms Wall Street clients.

The wife of Republican Texas Senator Ted Cruz, who announced in March hes running for president, is taking leave as a Houston-based managing director at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. to help with her husbands campaign.

Alex Stockham, a spokesman for Angelo, Gordon, declined to comment on Mary Pat Christie.

The Christies met in college and have been married since 1986. They have four children. Mary Pat Christie, 51, has worked for Angelo, Gordon since September 2012 and previously worked for Cantor Fitzgerald LP.

The governor, who formed a political action committee in January to boost his visibility, has trailed other Republicans in polls, including former Florida Governor Jeb Bush and Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker. His approval rating at home has dropped to record lows after a year plagued by a traffic scandal, a lagging economic recovery and nine credit-rating downgrades.

Christie has his monthly Ask the Governor call-in radio show Monday and a town-hall meeting later in the week. On Friday, he is scheduled to be at the Leadership Series hosted by the Northern Virginia Technology Council and Consumer Electronics Association.