Corinthian Shuts All Campuses, Ending College for 16,000
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Corinthian Colleges Inc. shut down its remaining 28 for-profit career schools, ending classes for about 16,000 students, in the biggest collapse in U.S. higher education.

All campuses will be closed effective Monday, Corinthian said in a statement Sunday. The company, which owns the Everest, Heald and WyoTech schools, said it will work with other colleges to try to place the students.

Corinthian collapsed last summer after the U.S. Education Department curtailed its access to federal student aid. The Santa Ana, California-based company agreed to sell half of its 107 campuses to Education Credit Management Corp. in November amid allegations that it falsified grades, attendance and job-placement rates.

We have attempted to do everything within our power to provide a quality education and an opportunity for a better future for our students, Jack Massimino, chief executive officer of Corinthian, said in the statement.

U.S. Education Under-Secretary Ted Mitchell said the departments workers will begin reaching out to Corinthians students to review their options, including the possibility of loan discharges.

What these students have experienced is unacceptable, Mitchell said in a statement. As Corinthian closes its doors for good, the department will continue to keep students at the heart of every decision we make.

Stop Enrolling

Corinthian was ordered April 17 to stop enrollments in California, where most of the schools are located. It was also fined $30 million by the Education Department for misrepresenting job-placement rates to attract students at its Heald business schools. Efforts to sell Heald were unsuccessful, the company said on Sunday.

Corinthians California schools werent part of the sale to Education Management, because the states Attorney General Kamala Harris refused to sign off, preferring to pursue restitution for students.

The Education Department said last week it will consider forgiving federal loans for students who can show they were defrauded by Corinthian. The school operator has been under investigation by 20 states, was sued by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and is facing three federal criminal probes.

The schools, mainly located in strip malls and office parks, had 72,000 students last summer, before the Education Department actions. Corinthian received $1.4 billion in federal student aid in 2013 alone.