Mallya Battles Diageo India Units Move to Oust Him From Board
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Vijay Mallya, chairman of an Indian liquor maker controlled by Diageo Plc, defied a board resolution asking him to quit following an internal enquiry that said he diverted funds to other group companies under his control.

United Spirits Ltd.s board sought Mallyas resignation on Saturday, after concluding an internal inquiry into loans and deposits made by the company over a three-year period, Indias biggest spirits maker said in an e-mailed statement. In response, Mallya said he intends to continue as chairman, and that the boards decision relied on a report based on half truths and twisted facts.

United Spirits move to eject Mallya, its former owner, marks the culmination of a rocky two years since it was acquired by Diageo. The company delayed fiscal year earnings three times, and said in September it had begun a detailed and expeditious enquiry into transactions including a loan of 13 billion rupees ($204 million) to Mallyas UB Group Holdings entities.

A full blown investigation needs to take place regarding the intra-group transactions, Amit Tandon, founder of Institutional Investor Advisory Services, a proxy-advisory firm, said by phone from Mumbai on Sunday. The chairman should step down, so that an unbiased investigation can take place. He can return to the position if the investigation shows that the accusations are baseless.

If Mallya exits from the United Spirits board, it may also mark the end of the reign of the flamboyant tycoon, who regularly hosts beach parties and owns stake in a Formula 1 racing team, even after banks declared him a so-called wilful defaulter when mounting debts grounded his Kingfisher Airlines Ltd.

Shares Surge

Shares of United Spirits have rallied 23 percent this year, beating the benchmark S&P BSE Sensex thats little changed during the period. The stock lost 4 percent on April 24 to 3,416.25 rupees, valuing the company at 496.5 billion rupees, while the Sensex fell 1.1 percent to 27,437.94.

I intend to continue as chairman of USL in the normal manner, Mallya said in an e-mailed statement. I have a valid contractual agreement with Diageo Plc which directly addresses my position as director and chairman of USL.

Foreseeing Mallyas decision to hold on to his position, the board resolved that it would recommend to shareholders to remove him as a director and chairman, the companys statement showed. In light of the enquirys findings, the board would also request parent Diageo to review its contractual obligations to support Mallyas chairmanship.

Recovering Dues

United Spirits board has authorized the company to pursue all rights and claims against, and expeditiously recover its dues from, the relevant parties to the extent possible, the company said in its statement. The companys investigation, headed by Managing Director Anand Kripalu, at first glance appears to indicate various improprieties and legal violations, it said.

Mallya, in his response, brought up a report submitted by accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers Plc, which he said was the basis of the boards decision. The report was severely flawed and he intends to mount a challenge against its findings, he said.

PwC made no effort to contact the then USL board members or auditors to verify the position and seek clarity, Mallya said in his statement. The inferences and allegations are unjustified and false.

Diageo had conducted a due diligence process prior to its acquisition of United Spirits, and all these transactions were reported to the London-based company at the time, Mallya said.

A related question is what recourse do Diageo shareholders have on the audit firm responsible for the due-diligence, Investor Advisory Services Tandon said.