Deutsche Bank Plans Postbank Sale in Strategy Overhaul
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Deutsche Bank AG, Germanys biggest lender, will cut its ownership in the Postbank consumer unit to a minority stake and shrink the securities business to revive profit thats missed targets.

The lender will cut back the number of countries in which it operates while boosting spending in its asset, wealth-management and transaction banking operations, the lender said in a statement on Friday. About 150 billion euros of assets ($163 billion) that are included when calculating the lender's leverage ratio will be cut at the investment bank, according to a person with knowledge of the matter.

Co-Chief Executive Officers Anshu Jain and Juergen Fitschen, a day after paying a record fine for rigging Libor, are implementing their biggest strategic overhaul since being appointed three years ago. They also need to win over investors as concern about the firms legal costs and capital buffers sent the stock to the worst performance among the banks global peers under the co-CEOs tenure.

The plan does not solve the issue of depressed profitability and will open the can of worms for funding questions, Alevizos Alevizakos, an analyst at Keefe Bruyette & Woods in London, said in an e-mail. But the company is now moving in the right direction. I find particularly positive that they highlight transaction banking and asset and wealth management businesses as the drivers for growth.

Postbank Sale

Deutsche Bank plans to cut its holding of Postbank to below 50 percent by selling shares in the lender to the public, said a person with knowledge of the review, who asked not to be identified because the details are private.

The reduction in the investment banks assets would amount to about 18 percent of the total, estimates by analysts at JPMorgan Chase & Co. show.

Jain and Fitschen set a target in 2012 to boost the companys after-tax return on equity to at least 12 percent in 2015 from 8.2 percent the previous year. That target was pushed back by one year after Deutsche Bank sold stock to boost capital in May. The measure of profitability stood at 2.7 percent last year.

Record Fine

Deutsche Bank on Thursday agreed to pay $2.5 billion to settle four investigations in the U.S. and the U.K., with the largest sanction for interest-rate market rigging. The bank said Wednesday it will report a first-quarter profit on near-record revenue even after booking 1.5 billion euros in litigation costs.

The company will publish full first-quarter earnings on Sunday and provide details on the strategic review Monday.

The managements track record over the last three years in terms of the targets they had set themselves has been far from spectacular, said Arun Melmane, a London-based analyst at Canaccord Genuity Corp. The bank needs to convince investors it can deliver returns above its cost of capital, he added.

Deutsche Bank turned to Postbank to diversify its funding mix by boosting consumer deposits in the midst of the global financial crisis. Just days before the collapse of Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., Deutsche Bank agreed to buy almost 30 percent of the consumer bank, with an option to increase the stake.

In subsequent years, it increased its share in Postbank, reaching about 94 percent in 2012, which it still holds. It spent a total of more than 6 billion euros.

The acquisition, part of former CEO Josef Ackermanns strategy, more than doubled the number of the banks consumer clients in Germany. Financial rewards had been slower to achieve.

Postbanks return on equity, including corporate-center capital and costs, stood at 4 percent last year, according to Barclays Plc analysts. That compares with 5 percent for the rest of Deutsche Banks German consumer-banking business and 13 percent for its retail businesses abroad.