De Blasio Criticizes Walker as Enemy of Middle Class
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
New York Mayor Bill de Blasio brought his message about income inequality to the home state of Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker, criticizing the potential Republican presidential candidate as an enemy of unions and the middle class.

Im not saying Scott Walker set out to destroy Wisconsins middle class, de Blasio said during a speech to 360 people at the annual fundraising dinner for the states Democratic Party in Milwaukee. But if that were his mission, I cant think of a damn thing hed done differently.

Walker, 57, a two-term governor, supported legislation after taking office in 2011 to limit collective bargaining for public employees. He also signed a so-called right-to-work bill this year allowing employees in union workplaces to opt out of paying dues, saying it gave workers freedom and would attract jobs.

Calling labor unions the backbone of the American middle class, de Blasio said the approach of Walker and other Republicans undermines the chance for workers to organize and negotiate better wages and benefits.

Hes actually part of a new breed of Republicans who are very actively working to dismantle the foundation of middle-class America, de Blasio said.

Kirsten Kukowski, a spokeswoman for Walkers political committee, Our American Revival, declined to comment.

Progressive Leader

De Blasio, 53, who in 2013 was the first Democrat in 20 years elected to lead the most-populous U.S. city, has vowed to become a national leader on progressive issues. Earlier this month, he traveled to Nebraska and Iowa.

In his speech to Wisconsin Democrats, de Blasio called for raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour and ending tax breaks that send jobs overseas. He also opposed passage of so-called fast-track authority for the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade treaty as a huge mistake.

De Blasio cited statistics including that the wealthiest one percent of Americans captured 91 percent of all the income gains since the Great Recession ended in June 2009, and that income disparity is the greatest since the 1920s.

The mayor also cited an analysis by the Pew Charitable Trusts in Washington that found that Wisconsins middle class is shrinking at a faster rate than in any other state.

He said Walkers policies hurt Wisconsins middle class by granting tax breaks to corporations and the wealthy while cutting aid to child care, public schools and the state university, which he described as the gateway to the middle class for generations of Wisconsinites.

Supply side or trickle down or voodoo economics, but whatever way you call it, its rewarding wealth over work, the mayor said.