Review: Adult Beginners, a Nick Kroll Comedy on Work-Life Balance
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
In the very adult beginning of Adult Beginners, Jake, a New York venture capitalist played by Nick Kroll, quickly proves hes an unrepentant jerk. Enjoy your Champagneits filled with roofies! he shouts at an office party, toasting the investors whove sunk their savings into his product, Mindsi, an atrocious rip-off of Google Glass. Youre all going to have so much more moneyon paper.

Seconds later, Jake is back in his bachelor pad, snorting cocaine and making out with a woman, when hes interrupted by a phone call: The supply chain broke down in China. The news is already on TechCrunch. The partys over. As investors start screaming about their emptied retirement accounts and devastated college funds, Jake just rolls his eyes.

The capitalist carnivore is a familiar, if unfortunate, Hollywood trope. Like Larry the Liquidator or Lex Luthor, hes typically a villain. At his best, hes an admirably inhuman, semi-autistic genius like The Social Networks Mark Zuckerberg. More often, hes the enviable antihero, as in Wall Street, Boiler Room, and The Wolf of Wall Street, which are all essentially gangster flicks. Like James Cagneys 1949 classic, White Heat, they ask audiences to gawk at a wild man during his rise to power (Made it, Ma! Top of the world!), until hes gunned down in a blaze of glory. We like to see Leonardo DiCaprios douche bag Jordan Belfort party on his yacht and Michael Douglass Gordon Gekko outsmart the feds, but we dont want them to get away with iteven if their real-life analogs often do.

Adult Beginners takes a more unusual path. Based on a story by Kroll, the film begins where many similar ones end. Jake suffers his fall, but then the man of much money and little taste is offered some sympathy.

First, he takes the train from Manhattan to the suburbs and asks his pregnant sister (Rose Byrne) and her husband (Bobby Cannavale) to let him crash. They have a different idea: free rent and $300 a week to baby-sit their 3-year-old son. Jake accepts.

Kroll has mastered the art of playing crass egomaniacs such as attorney Ruxin on The League and a variety of cads in sketches on the Kroll Show. His self-satisfied smirk is famous enough that Parks and Recreation created a character for him called, simply, the Douche. Over and over, hes invited viewers to laugh at the selfish pricks he portrays. But hes never asked fans to like them. Mostly, thats why Adult Beginners worksbecause Kroll is unexpectedly endearing.

It also helps that this isnt a financial revenge comedy, like Trading Places or Horrible Bosses, in which the fallen white-collar guy plots against the executives who screwed him. Jake instead becomes a genuine part of his sisters family. He swaps snorting lines with bimbos for attendingand enjoyingkids swim class.

Just when Krolls character seems to have earnestly embraced family time, he takes a junior-level gig as a trader, and it seems as if he might fall back into old habits. His boss (Josh Charles) is the same kind of jerk he used to be, a swaggering, golfing, homophobic bro. Jake thrives until he tells the guy he has to leave work for a family emergency. This isnt JerryMaguire, dude. I wont fire you, the boss replies. You put up numbers. But you have a choice to make: Either youre the guy who sits back in that chair right now, or youre the guy who leaves work for his family.

Tapping into real-life workplace fear, the manager tells Jake he wont be a top earner if he ducks out early. Hell find himself stuck in the middlea phrase Charles delivers with a tone of utter disgust. When Jake says hes going to go anyway, it becomes obvious that he has less in common with Charlie Sheen, hustling in Wall Street with a vein popping in his forehead, than with Anne Hathaway, settling for a more sustainable path in The Devil Wears Prada.

In the movies, female heroines make tough choices like this all the time. But ambitious guys almost never sacrifice professional success. Either theyre destroyed at the end, or they get everything they ever wanted: the money, the career, the girl. Jake realizes, like so many Hollywood women before him, that he cant have it all, but that maybe he can keep a job that doesnt ruin his life.