The 10Best White Shirts for Every Body Type
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
There are literally millions of white dress shirts in the world. Maybe billions. But finding one thats the perfect fit for you can be surprisingly difficultyoull find different cuts and different collars, and theres that thing that happens when you get one thats too short and it comes out of your pants. So when you find a great white shirt, you can hardly beblamed for wanting to buy a dozen at once. After all, the white shirt is a blank canvas for the rest of your outfit; nobody notices if youre wearing the same brand day in and day out.

A great option is to get a customshirt, either in person at a tailor shop or from online retailers like Ratio Clothing or Proper Cloth. But if you prefer to shop in a store or from a brand you trust, here are 10versions of the white shirt from reliable, top fashion labels. Ive highlighted which ones are suited to which body types, and for what occasions. Theres a shirthere for you, I promise. Now go and buy 12of them.

The experts behind the shirting company, Hugh & Crye developed a sizing system called the fit finder, where men can find dress shirts based on their body type. Fits range from short/skinny to tall/broad and are offered across16 sizes. First, find your fit: Answer a few basic questions, and punch inyour height, weight, and body type. Second, shop away.

The Ralph Lauren Black Label shirt is made of 100 percent cotton, which is thick enough not to be transparent and feels like a soft jersey. The tailored sloan oxford shirt features a trimmed silhouette, and the sheen makes it appropriatefor black tie.

When it comes to formalwear, Tom Ford should be on your list; he has you covered from head to toe, with shoes, ties, and accessories. The designertraditionally cuts farslimmer than most, and hissizing starts at 38, so you might want to go for a size larger than youre normally used to.

English brand Turnbull &Asser is one of my personal favorites. Itsbeen in the game for more than130 years but only a year agointroduced a more tailoredstyle. Theslim-fit white marcella dress shirt is a great one, and it features thebrandssignature three-button cuff. The regent collar, which is an open look thats stillless severe than a cutaway collar, gives you the option of wearing a tie or ditching it for that casual vibe.

For:Men with average body types who sometimes like to go tieless

This is the highest-quality white dress shirt at a moderate price point. Brooks Brothers offers four different fits (Madison, Regent, Milano, and Traditional) and a huge range of neck- and sleeve-size combinations.

For:Tall gents, and men who need a more generous cut

Charvet is a high-end Parisian shirtmaker that used to designcustom shirts for kings and the royals. Thats luxury.(Also, itsaccessories are beautiful and classic.) If you really want a special experience, and a shirt to match, you can get one made to your exact measurements from one of 6,000 fabrics in Charvets Paris shop.

If I couldaward this the best white point-collar shirt ever, I would. This cotton-twill Ermenegildo Zegna shirt is an easy choice for work and afterward. Its comfortable, sleek, and tapered at the waist for a flattering fit on a trimmer gentlemanbut it comes in many size combinations.

Another brand at the helm of the shirting industry is Houston-based, family-owned company Hamilton, which isknown for itsbespoke services and exceptional craftsmanship. All Hamilton shirts have a tailored fit, meaning the chest and sleeves are cut slimmer.

This Swedish brand cherisheshigh quality and genuine craftsmanship, and it shows. Etons Red Ribbon collection offers a selection of dress shirts, some of the best white options, in different collar and cuff variations and four different fits.

For: All body types; varyingfits and size options to try

Most of Thom Brownes creations are extravagant and madespecifically for the runway. (Lets be honest: No one is going to the office wearing an elephant headpiece.) But I do applaud Mr. Browne for his creativity with more standard items, like blazers. He realizes its the small details that matter. What I love most about this basic white shirt is the pop of Thom Brownes signature red, white, and blue.

For:Average body type,but if youre over 6feet, stay away; someone who can wear a dress shirt with a little extra flair at work

Moti Ankari is the associate market editor for Bloomberg. Follow him on Twitter@motiankariand Instagram@themetroman, or contact him atmankari@bloomberg.net.