Christmas is a time for celebrating and enjoying life. But it also comes with its fair share of health problems, particularly if you enjoy yourself a little too much. The good news is your pharmacy is here to help.

One thing we can't predict is the weather, so if it's too cold, wet or icy to get your prescription over the Christmas period, many pharmacies offer helpful prescription services. These include a repeat prescription service  which means the pharmacy arranges your prescription at the right time if you need regular medicines from your GP  and a prescription delivery service that brings your medicines right to your front door.

Eating and drinking

If you eat and drink more at Christmas than usual, your pharmacy can help by providing relief from indigestion and hangovers.

Also called dyspepsia, indigestion often starts soon after you've been eating or drinking. Normally experienced as pain or discomfort in your chest or stomach, it can also make you feel uncomfortably full, as well as causing bloating, nausea and vomiting.

So this Christmas, don't miss out on all the fun. Ask your pharmacist to recommend an indigestion remedy that would be best for you.

If you have one or two drinks too many at your Christmas party, your pharmacist can also advise you about which painkillers may help you cope with a nasty headache the morning after. If you have a sensitive stomach, for instance, your pharmacist may recommend paracetamol, as aspirin and ibuprofen could upset your stomach.

An ice pack on your forehead or on the back of your neck can also soothe a pounding head. Ask your pharmacist about handy ice packs that you keep in the fridge or freezer. Or alternatively use a bag of frozen peas (wrap the bag in a tea towel before placing it on your skin).

Party feet

Most people like to let their hair down on the dance floor at Christmas parties. But it's no fun if you end up with sore, throbbing feet.

Again, your pharmacist can help. Most pharmacies stock a range of footcare products that can keep you dancing until dawn, including arch supports, orthotics, and heel and gel cushions that are designed to relieve foot strain and aching feet  even if you're wearing killer heels. While you're at it, stock up on blister plasters and, if you need them, products that soothe foot problems such as corns and bunions.

Festive stress

Christmas and New Year may be fun, but the festive season can be stressful too, especially if you're doing a lot of entertaining. This year, don't let the pressure get to you. Ask your pharmacist to recommend a gentle, herbal stress relief preparation that could help you tackle nervous tension.

On the other hand, you may find Christmas exhausting if you've been running around buying presents and food for your friends and family. But if you've been suffering from a persistent lack of energy lately, you may need extra iron (ask your pharmacist to recommend a gentle iron supplement that may help).

Shaping up

Most people tend to start the New Year a few pounds heavier than they were before Christmas. When you decide to lose the weight you've gained  or, indeed, if you want to slim down before Christmas  ask your pharmacist if they can help.

A growing number of pharmacies are giving advice and support to people who want manage their weight. Find your nearest pharmacy that offers a weight management service by using our Pharmacy Finder tool on our homepage.