George W. Bush Opens Up About 2016 Race
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
LAS VEGAS  Former President George W. Bush offered rare, and broad-ranging, remarks Saturday night about current national security threats and the 2016 presidential campaign to a large audience of Jewish donors, suggesting that sanctions on Iran should not be lifted, that his last name was a burden to his brother, the likely presidential candidate Jeb Bush, and that Hillary Rodham Clinton, while formidable, was beatable.

Mr. Bush sat on stage for an hour-long question-and-answer session in front of a ballroom that included Sheldon Adelson, the Republican donor who owns the Italian-themed Venetian hotel and casino that hosted the spring meeting of the Republican Jewish Coalition, of which Mr. Adelson is also a board member. Mr. Bushs remarks come as Jeb Bush is on the verge of formally announcing his candidacy, after four months of aggressive fundraising.

At one point, according to more than a half-dozen guests leaving the ballroom and one attendee who transcribed remarks during the event, Mr. Bush was asked a winking question about the qualities he sought in a president. But instead of aggressively boosting his brother, who he described as capable, Mr. Bush acknowledged being a liability to his brothers candidacy, noting that it was easy for his rivals to say in debates that we dont need another Bush.

He basically said being a Bush is a challenge said Norm Coleman, a former senator from Minnesota and board member of the Republican Jewish Coalition, who attended the speech.

He essentially said people dont want dynasties in America, recalled Elise Weingarten, another attendee. (The event, held behind closed doors, was off the record, with a no notes rule announced at the beginning.)

According to other attendees, Mr. Bush expressed a reluctance to enter the campaign fray, because it would be unhelpful to his brother, but also unseemly. Thats why you wont see me, he said.

But on this evening, Mr. Bush, speaking in a relaxed, warm style with several humorous asides, was front and center as he received extended ovations. He spoke admiringly of the good candidates in the field, and reserved his political assessments for Mrs. Clinton, the Democratic frontrunner for the nomination who last campaigned to replace Mr. Bush in 2008.

Mr. Bushs candid remarks come as his brother convenes the first major meeting of his donors and supporters in Miami Beach on Sunday and Monday.

Harvey Weingarten, another attendee, said that Mr. Bush said the former first lady faced a predicament in determining whether to seek distance or continuity with the Obama administration for which she served as secretary of state.

Its going to be hard for her to defend or support the presidents legacy, Mr. Weinstein recalled Mr. Bush saying.

Given the current state of the world, the former president said, its tough either way.

He spoke dismissively of candidates who surrounded themselves with sycophants and bemoaned a culture built around a single person, or even a party. The goal, he stressed, should be about serving the national interest.

Mr. Bush, whose war in Iraq eventually became deeply unpopular and fueled President Obamas 2008 candidacy, weighed back in on the Middle East and the administrations current pursuit of a nuclear deal with Iran, which was strongly opposed by most the people in the room.

He said he was skeptical about lifting sanctions against Iran at a time when its government seemed to be caving in, attendees said, and regretted the leverage the United States would lose as a result of lifting the sanctions. He questioned whether the Iranian president, Hassan Rouhani, under whom the current framework for a deal has been discussed, represents a new policy or a new spokesman for the old regime, Mr. Weingarten recalled. He said that Mr. Bush talked about how there is no transparency in Iran, because the supreme leader, and not the will of the people, picked the presidents.

And he was animated when speaking about the group calling itself the Islamic State, which he referred to as the second act of Al Qaeda.

Several attendees sensed a tacit critique of Mr. Obama and his failure to follow through on his threats to use force when Mr. Bush said you gotta mean it when talking tough, and that Americas allies and enemies needed to know where an American leader stood. He also discussed his own approach in Iraq, saying he changed course when it was warranted.

You call in the military and say, Heres my goal. Whats your plan to help me achieve that goal?' attendees quoted him as saying. He added that when asked what had to be done with terrorists bent on Americas destruction, the answer was well, you kill em, several attendees recalled.

At other points, he cited Lindsey Graham, the senator from South Carolina and possible presidential candidate, as saying, pulling out of Iraq was a strategic blunder, but he also spoke warmly about how his granddaughter called him jefe, and how the White House was a museum more than a home.

And Mr. Bush also appeared to add a little humor in the post-presidency. He told how President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia made fun of his small dog, Barney, by telling the American president, You want to see a real dog?

Mr. Putin called over his large dog, which the Russian leader apparently described as larger and more powerful. Mr. Bush recounted that he later told the same story to the Canadian prime minister, Stephen Harper, who he said replied, Youre lucky all he did was show you his dog.