Scott Walker, a Pastors Son, Runs on Faith as Iowa Beckons
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
DES MOINES  Scott Walker, the son of a Baptist preacher, learned a lot about being a politician by going to church.

He was introduced to glad-handing while greeting worshipers beside his father after Sunday services. His confidence as a public speaker began at 2, when he delivered a Christmas greeting from the pulpit, and it blossomed when he preached occasional sermons as a teenager. And now, Mr. Walkers lifelong church involvement may be a powerful asset as he positions himself to run for the Republican presidential nomination and focuses on early primary and caucus states dominated by evangelical voters.

Already a hero to fiscal conservatives  both the Tea Party base and billionaire donors like Charles G. and David H. Koch  Mr. Walker, the governor of Wisconsin, made his most explicit appeal yet to the Christian right on Saturday before hundreds of social conservatives in Iowa. During his toughest times in office, he said, What sustained us all along the way is we had people who said, We prayed for you. 

His implicit message is that in an unusually fractured Republican field, with 10 or more candidates potentially on the ballot in the Iowa caucuses next year, he is best positioned to unite the party.

Ahead of Saturdays candidate event  organized by the Iowa Faith and Freedom Coalition, part of the national group led by the religious activist Ralph Reed  Mr. Walker hardened his positions on issues considered litmus tests for social conservatives, including abortion and immigration. He suggested in an interview with Glenn Beck on Monday that there are too many legal immigrants, a position to the right of other 2016 hopefuls.

But it is Mr. Walkers biography that could make him especially attractive to Christian conservatives. A life story that began in the Baptist churches his father led in Colorado, Iowa and Wisconsin continues today at the nondenominational evangelical church he attends in his hometown, Wauwatosa, Wis.

My relationship with God drives every major decision in my life, Mr. Walker said in an emailed statement. While that relationship does not direct his daily decisions, he said, our walk of faith helps us prepare for those decisions and provides us comfort as we seek to do Gods will.

Advertisement

During his political rise in Wisconsin, Mr. Walker did not often emphasize his faith. But evangelicals make up nearly 60 percent of Republican caucusgoers in Iowa. They are an important factor in Southern primaries. And they continue to have an outsize influence on the Republican nominating process.

While he was raised a dutiful P.K., or pastors kid, Mr. Walkers spiritual journey has not been without conflict. Over the years, his political views have sometimes made him a source of controversy in the places where he has worshiped.

Mr. Walkers father, the Rev. Llewellyn S. Walker, was a minister in the American Baptist Churches USA, a more pluralistic denomination than the conservative and better-known Southern Baptist Convention. Pastor Llew, as he was known, is a Republican, but politics and the social causes of the day did not animate his First Baptist Church in Delavan, Wis., where Mr. Walker lived from age 10 until he left for college. His father was foremost a caregiver to the congregation, said the churchs current pastor, the Rev. Michael Ida. He would spend half a day sitting in the hospital room of an ailing church member, praying and shooting the breeze.

Advertisement

Before the elder Mr. Walker retired in 1995, at the age of 56, he struggled with depression, Mr. Ida said. His wife, Pat, and the teenage Scott Walker shouldered some of his pastoral duties. There were Sundays when Scott would preach the sermon, Mr. Ida said.

Continue reading the main story Video

As an adult, Mr. Walker moved to Wauwatosa, a Milwaukee suburb, in search of a Republican-leaning district in which to run for the State Assembly. He and his wife, Tonette, joined another American Baptist congregation, Underwood Memorial Baptist Church, which had a history of social activism.

A dozen years later, in 2005, Underwood voted to affiliate with the Association of Welcoming and Affirming Baptists, a gay-accepting national group, and a small rainbow flag was affixed to its signboard. (The hiring of a woman as pastor in 2003 had accelerated its progressive tilt.)

Mr. Walker, by then a candidate for governor, left the church.

Tonette said they were looking for a more family-friendly place, said Marilyn Carrington, a longtime member.

Some members believed he had cut ties because of Underwoods liberal drift. As soon as we put the flag on the sign, he was out of there, said Kevin Genich, a former church member who knew Mr. Walker.

After a campaign event in Iowa on Friday, Mr. Walker deflected a question about whether he had left Underwood because it openly embraced gay members. He said there were few children the ages of his sons there. Ultimately, we wanted to go to a place where our kids would have the ability to interact with other kids, he said.

Mr. Walkers parents, who in retirement had moved to be near their son and joined Underwood, had no objections. They continue to worship there.

Meadowbrook Church, where Mr. Walker now worships, is politically and theologically conservative. It is accepted among the churchs clergy and congregation that the Bible is the word of God, without error, and that Christs return is imminent. It is led by a council of elders that is open only to men.

While the Rev. Jamie Washam, the pastor of Underwood, opposed a Wisconsin ballot measure to ban same-sex marriage in 2006, Meadowbrooks pastor urged members to vote to define marriage as between one man and one woman. The church cannot recognize any alternative arrangements as being Gods will for any persons or society, the pastor, John Mackett, wrote on a church blog.

At the same time, Meadowbrook is not politically active on issues like abortion. Sermons hew close to Bible readings.

Mr. Mackett, who stepped down as pastor last year, said he had often received text messages from Mr. Walker on a Monday discussing his sermon. It was never a trite remark, he said. It came out of a thoughtful reflection on something that was said or happened in church.

Describing the governor as a very disciplined man, he said Mr. Walker followed a morning routine that included exercise, prayer and Bible study. Before being elected governor, Mr. Walker and his wife met with other couples for Bible study Sunday evenings in their home.

Advertisement

Scotts seeking God is a 24/7 thing, said Mr. Macketts wife, Betsy. Its not just checking a box on Sunday.

But Meadowbrook did not escape the political convulsions touched off during Mr. Walkers first term as governor. In a speech to the congregation during its annual meeting in 2013, Mr. Mackett pleaded for an end to the turmoil caused by slander and name calling among members divided by politics.

He declined to elaborate in an interview. But Lee Heyward, who succeeded Mr. Mackett as head pastor, said, John and Meadowbrook were going through a really tumultuous time during that whole season of Act 10, referring to the law Mr. Walker signed in 2011 that stripped Wisconsins public employees of most bargaining rights.

The church has many members who are teachers, Mr. Heyward said, and they vociferously opposed the governor. There were people in the church that wanted John to come out and speak against Governor Walker and his policies, Mr. Heyward said. There were also supporters of the governor who wanted to hear their pastor defend him. Mr. Mackett refused to introduce politics into his sermons. Some people on both sides left Meadowbrook. Mr. Walker said that when tens of thousands of protesters filled the State Capitol during the debate over Act 10, my faith helped me stay calm and focus on the issue instead of matching anger with anger.

Beyond policies, what evangelical voters say they want to learn about candidates is whether they speak a common language about the role of faith in their lives. On Saturday, Mr. Walker sought to show just that, telling a lengthy story of a devotional text he had been sent by a friend. The passage was meant to console him in case he lost his 2012 recall election. It really would have been powerful if I had lost, Mr. Walker said.

But not long after his victory, he learned of a supporter, a Wisconsin dairy farmer, who had died of a heart attack the day before the June election. Mr. Walker said he realized the devotional passage might console the mans widow. The governor told of calling her, and he read the phrases, in the voice of Jesus, that he had read to her.

 The way to walk through demanding times is to grip my hand tightly,  he read, letting the leather book fall open as if leading a congregation.  Regardless of the days problems, I can keep you in perfect peace as you stay close to me. 