The latest news and views from the world of health and wellbeing
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Nutrition file: Tomatoes

Raw or cooked, tomatoes bring flavour and colour to any salad or cooked dish. But they dont just taste good, theyre full of nutrients too:

Tomatoes are a source of several vitamins, including vitamin C (one large raw tomato contains 23mg), vitamin A (1516iu) and vitamin K (14mcg), and are low in sodium, saturated fat and cholesterol.

A large raw tomato contains 27mcg of folic acid, as well as 431mg of potassium, 20mg of magnesium and 18mg of calcium.

Tinned tomatoes are also a source of iron, with 1.8mg in one 190g can (a medium raw tomato has 0.3mg of iron).

(Source: NutritionData.com)

Heart disease deaths fall across Europe

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) may still be the biggest cause of death in Europe, but a study published in the European Heart Journal shows fewer people are dying of CVD today compared with 10 years ago.

However, the country you live in could make a big difference to your risk. According to the study, 205 men and 129 women per 100,000 people died of CVD in this country compared with 915 men and 517 women per 100,000 people in Russia.

Its good news that the number of lives being taken too soon by cardiovascular disease is falling across Europe, says Simon Gillespie, chief executive of the British Heart Foundation. However, the fact remains that heart disease and stroke remain the biggest cause of death among Europeans.

Protect your eyes this winter

Cold, dry, winter air can cause eye discomfort and other problems. Steve Schallhorn, chief medical officer at Optical Express offers these tips for keeping your eyes healthy:

Moisturise Use a lubricating eye drop or spray products to keep your eyes hydrated. Increase humidity Place some bowls of water around your house when the central heatings on to put some moisture back into the air. Break away Staring at a computer screen all day can reduce your blinking rate, which can make your eyes feel uncomfortable. So take regular screen breaks. Drink water Stay topped up with water or herbal tea when its cold, and limit alcohol, which can affect your eyes by causing dehydration. Dont forget your sunglasses If its a bright winter day  or youre going abroad for winter sports  wearing sunglasses can protect your eyes from harmful UV rays.

To find a product for dry or uncomfortable eyes, as your pharmacist.

Brits spend a year with a hangover

New research by Macmillan Cancer Support suggests people in Britain are spending almost a year of their lives (315 days) with a hangover, with the average person having a hangover at least once a month. A shocking seven percent of people in this country will have an estimated 3,024 hangovers in their lifetime.

Asthma attack: are you at risk?

A survey carried out by Allergy UK suggests more than three quarters of asthma sufferers dont realise they may be at risk of having a fatal attack, despite thinking their condition is under control.

There are three warning signs for patients to look out for, says Dr Monica Nordstrom, respiratory physician at Ashford and St Peters Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust.

If you use more than one reliever inhaler a month, if youve been prescribed one or more courses of oral corticosteroids in the past 12 months or if you are consistently missing work or school because of your asthma  these can all be signs that your asthma may be more severe than you think and you should seek more help from your doctor or specialist nurse.

Dont want to talk about it

One of the things people find too embarrassing to mention to their GP is bowel problems, suggests a recent survey.

Carried out for Dulcolax, the survey asked 2,000 adults if they had a health question they were too embarrassed to ask their doctor. Just over a quarter said they did, with bowel problems the most embarrassing topic after sex-related issues.

Trim your waist for a longer life

If you want to live longer, make sure your waistline measures half of your height  whatever your age, gender or ethnicity  say City University London scientists.

Just put a tape measure around your waist without breathing in. If it measures more than half your height, you could lose months or even years of your life, the researchers suggest. Thats because your waist shows how much central fat you have, which is linked to high cholesterol, diabetes and heart disease.

Struggling with your weight? Ask your pharmacist about over-the-counter products that may help or weight management services available at the pharmacy.

Be prepared for... Hangovers

Even the most saint-like individual may be tempted to drink a bit more than they should at Christmas or New Year. And as anyone whos ever had too much alcohol knows, a hangover usually follows.

There are no cures for a hangover, the best way to avoid one is to drink in moderation or avoid alcohol altogether. But if you do overindulge, here are a few things that may help ease your morning-after symptoms:

Painkillers Ask your pharmacist to recommend a product to soothe a thumping head (paracetamol is usually advisable, as its less likely than other painkillers to irritate your stomach).

Ask your pharmacist to recommend a product to soothe a thumping head (paracetamol is usually advisable, as its less likely than other painkillers to irritate your stomach). Ice pack Your pharmacist can also supply you with an ice pack that you can keep in the freezer. Put it on your forehead or at the back of your neck to ease a sore head.

Your pharmacist can also supply you with an ice pack that you can keep in the freezer. Put it on your forehead or at the back of your neck to ease a sore head. Stomach settler If you usually get an upset stomach with a hangover, ask your pharmacist to recommend a suitable antacid.

If you usually get an upset stomach with a hangover, ask your pharmacist to recommend a suitable antacid. Fluids Some hangover symptoms are caused by dehydration, so drink plenty of water, soda water or isotonic drinks to replace lost fluids.

Walking or cycling to work improves wellbeing

Leave the car at home and walk or cycle to work if you want improved mental health, says a survey by health economists at the University of East Anglia. Those who walked or cycled to the office said they felt better able to concentrate and were under less strain than if they travelled by car.

If you cant walk or cycle, using public transport may also make you feel better than if you drive, the report also suggests.

Diabetes? Dont miss out this Xmas

For many, Christmas means office parties. But you dont have to miss out if you have diabetes. To help avoid having a hypo (low blood glucose)  which can be more likely when you drink alcohol  never drink on an empty stomach and make sure you have a starchy snack before going to bed.

Its also a good idea to alternate alcoholic drinks with soft drinks. Make sure your friends know you have diabetes, carry some diabetes ID and your hypo treatment with you. And always pace yourself

For more advice on living with diabetes, visit www.diabetes.org.uk and if you have Type 2 diabetes log onto Diabetes UKs free e-learning tool www.type2diabetesandme.co.uk

Benefits check

In our article Living with a long-term condition (issue 20), we mentioned some people may be eligible for Disability Living Allowance. However, if youre a new claimant and aged 16 or older, you must apply for Personal Independence Payment (PIP), which is gradually replacing Disability Living Allowance.