The latest health and wellbeing news for the young at heart
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Natural ways to stay healthy for longer

Whether you want to age gracefully or disgracefully, its highly likely that you want to stay healthy as you get on in life. Unbeelievable Health nutritional consultant Erin McCann has the following tips on ageing well, naturally:

Eat lots of foods that contain antioxidants, including fruits such as berries and citrus, and vegetables such as leafy greens and squashes

Eat balanced meals and healthy snacks regularly, while reducing your intake of stimulants such as coffee

Eat more fresh oily fish (salmon, mackerel, haddock, sardines) and less processed foods and takeaways

Exercise regularly  outdoors wherever possible  and get adequate sleep and rest

Also ask your pharmacist about natural supplements that may support your health at your time of life.

Older people stay away from the gym

Eight out of 10 people aged 50 and over have either never been to a gym or havent been for more than a year because they find it intimidating. Yet a third say they want to stay active and healthy to look after their children and grandchildren, suggests a YouGov survey for Warner Leisure Hotels.

Nine percent say theyre put off going to the gym because its full of young people, while 16 percent say they just dont like the activities on offer. Instead, walking is the favourite way of staying active among the over-50s, followed by swimming and cycling.

Long life is also in the mind

A healthy lifestyle is essential for longevity. But according to scientists from University College London, having a strong sense of purpose and wellbeing could add two years to your life.

The researchers  published in The Lancet medical journal  studied more than 9,000 Brits with an average age of 65.

I should cocoa

If youre fond of a cup of cocoa before bedtime, theres good news. Medical researchers believe chemicals found in cocoa called dietary cocoa flavanols could help boost memory and fight off dementia in healthy people aged 50 - 69.

The findings are published online by the journal Nature Neuroscience.

Language learning keeps brains working

If you dont want your brain to slow down, learn a new language. Researchers writing in the Journal of Neurolinguistics suggest people who are studying a new vocabulary have a more connected brain network than those who arent learning anything new.

Learning a new language can help lead to more graceful ageing, says lead researcher, Professor Ping Li.