Tracy Anderson: Strong Is the New Sexy
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Nathaniel Welch

Need a little nudge to feel ready for beach season? Fitness superstar Tracy Anderson is here with the tips and inspiration that will get your body and confidence in peak form for summerand the rest of the year.When I arrive to chat with workout guru Tracy Anderson in Los Angeles, she tells me it's not just going to be the two of us.Her kids, Sam, 16, and Penelope, 2, are home, and Penny needs to eat. So the trainer from Noblesville, Ind.wearing jeans, a ruffled shirt and sneakersbreast-feeds her daughter while we talk. "I do not nurse until they're 5, just so you know," she says, laughing. "Not that I'm judging anyone who does that!"Tracy, 40, has just gotten back from filming a streaming version of one of her classes, the latest offering in the empire she launched 16 years ago called the Tracy Anderson Method. Tracy, who leads studio classes in L.A., New York City and the Hamptons, developed the at-home workout DVD series titledand recently created, a video-streaming option with a new installment of Tracy's master-class workouts available every Wednesday (the subscription runs about $80 a month). The workouts, based in part on Tracy's training as a dancer, are designed to help clients form a balanced bodyan approach that worked so well for Gwyneth Paltrow, the actress partnered up with her in the business.Now Tracy is determined to help us all achieve our healthiest body, whatever our shapeand she means it. "I want to get away from 'Tracy Anderson is going to make you teeny-tiny.' I'm not trying to make everyone the same. To me, 'hot' is not defined by a height or weight or measurement; hot is going to the root of who you are."Over a spread of cookies, tortilla chips and guacamoleall soy-free, nut-free, dairy-free and gluten-freeTracy shares the weight struggles that shaped her and what every woman should know about getting fitness results.I was incredibly shy until about fifth grade. To this day I struggle with that. It's very difficult for me to be heard if I want something. But if I'm advocating for people's health or something that I know is right for my children, then my voice is strong.I was 19 and gained about 35 pounds. I attribute it to the wonderful world of marketing and the science of "everything's fat-free." Fat-free cookies. Fat-free frozen yogurt. I was like, "Really? They're fat-free?! I'm so on board." I've always loved food. I grew up with mashed potatoes, chicken and noodles, biscuits and gravy. My mom was a ballerina, but her metabolic rate runs very high, and she was able to eat, like, literally a trucker's breakfast, and she would still stay superthin.I had a scholarship to dance school, so I felt a huge responsibility to succeed. But I was clearly gaining weight. I'm 5 feet tall, so in pink tights and a leotard, any amount of weight is going to start sticking out pretty quick. I was like, "I'm not going to starve myself." Instead, I was like, "OK, maybe I won't have the large fat-free frozen yogurt after school. Maybe I'll have the small." And I started exercising. It was very apparent to me that being a ballerina wasn't going to happen. But I've always been, like, "Welp, there's a different purpose for me. There is something else I'm supposed to be doing." Then at 21, I gained 60 pounds while pregnant with my son, and that's when I started creating my method.They work out for social purposes or because they want to fit into something. They don't really sit and say, "Wait, what's best for me and my body?" It's like, "Oh, people over there are drinking that Kool-Aid. I'm going to go do that."Anybody is going to lose weight if they drink liquid all day long. That's like lunchtime liposuction or freezing the fat cells off. You don't own that change. The weight is coming back.I love working out, though there are times I definitely don't want to, like Sunday mornings. I've got two delicious children. She wakes up earlier than him and walks in, like, "Let's go to the park!" And I'm like, "Ugh, bag the workout. I just want to make pancakes." So my brain goes, "Why is it that I have to give away the workout to make them pancakes?" Instead, it's "I'm going to make them pancakes and do my own streaming workout in the living room instead of going to my studio." There's a constant recalculation in all of our heads all day long.You will never catch me on a spin bike. I'll take a bike ride with my son, but I will never do the same thing over and over and over. That creates imbalance in your body. It doesn't matter if you're a size 10 or you're a size 2; you want to feel in proportion.