New pregnancy app for Apple Watch now available from The Bump
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The Bump, a leading multiplatform pregnancy and parenting brand, today announced the launch of The Bump Pregnancy App for Apple Watch. The pregnancy app is a complement to the brand's mobile iOS app and offers a customized user experience, serving only the most relevant content and tools to match the user's week of pregnancy.

On the heels of launching a completely rebuilt desktop and mobile website as well as three mobile apps in the last year, The Bump continues to innovate with the next step of its mobile-first product strategy for its growing audience of savvy millennial parents. Currently, more than 50 percent of traffic for The Bump comes from mobile and the Apple Watch app is the next addition to the brand's suite of products designed to give mobile parents the exact information they need anytime, anywhere.

The Bump Pregnancy app for Apple Watch feeds busy expecting moms and dads with personalized content right to the wrist, including notifications for appointments with suggested to-do's to help keep themand babyon track. The app also displays a photo feed of images of mom's growing baby bump, weekly updates on the size of baby and the ability to use Siri to add a to-do or an appointment as well as check off completed tasks, all on Apple Watch.

"We know that during pregnancy, especially for those experiencing it for the first time, parents want to consume as much information as they possibly can. The Bump has been an innovator in developing personalized technology to break down the abundance of information moms and dads need to know and deliver them tailored content throughout each week of pregnancy," said Josh Himwich, vice president of product for The Bump. "We've now taken the most important information and updates from our popular pregnancy app and customized it into need-to-know notifications and glances on Apple Watch, so expectant parents can feel confident they're always clued in to the development of their baby."

Features of The Bump Pregnancy app for Apple Watch include:

Notifications for the start of each new week of pregnancy, including calendar appointments and suggested to-dos, with the ability to check off a to-do, add a to-do or schedule an appointment

Ability to use Siri to add a to-do or appointment

Glances at images of and information on how big baby is (for example, your baby is the size of a lime), based on your week of pregnancy

Headlines of top stories relevant to your week of pregnancy, with a handoff to your iPhone to read the full article

Countdown to your due date

Photo feed of weekly belly photos that you've captured in your iPhone app

The Bump Pregnancy app for Apple Watch is available for free on the App Store or in the Apple Watch app on iPhone.