TCSPP announces launch of Ph.D. in Applied Behavior Analysis Program
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The Chicago School of Professional Psychology (TCSPP), a nonprofit university and one of the leading institutions devoted exclusively to the study of psychology, and related behavioral and health sciences, announces the launch of its Ph.D. in Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) Program at the Washington, D.C. Campus and online. The program, already available at the Chicago Campus, will seat its inaugural class in Washington, D.C. and online in fall 2015. Additionally, the Los Angeles Campus offers a Ph.D. in Psychology, with a Behavior Analysis Specialization.

"The Chicago School has been an innovator in the field of psychology for more than 35 years, offering students an unrivaled range of programs, intensive real-world training and the practical, professional mentorship needed to launch their careers," said The Chicago School's president, Michele Nealon-Woods, Psy.D. "We are proud of our continued leadership in advancing academic program offerings that meet the needs of today's student body and ensures the continued delivery of mental health and behavioral services to clients and communities most in need. "

The Chicago School's ABA Ph.D. course sequence trains students to use a natural science approach to understand human behavior, then implement that approach to meaningfully improve socially significant behaviors.

"The ABA program prepares students for rewarding careers as leading practitioners and researchers who can successfully respond to the needs of diverse populations in educational, clinical, and business settings," said Interim Online Program Chair, Robyn Catagnus, Ed.D., BCBA-D, LBS. "The scientist-practitioner model is infused across the curricula to encourage students to become consumers of new research findings, evaluators of their own interventions, and researchers who produce and contribute new research to the applied and scientific community."

At the M.S. level, the program incorporates the content areas and practicum requirements to make graduates eligible for national board certification by the Behavior Analyst Certification Board. Additionally, the program provides a solid foundation in the philosophy, science, and application of behavior analysis. Students enrolled at the Ph.D. level will experience a program that expands upon the knowledge and skills taught in the M.S. program; one that strengthen students' research and clinical skills, broadens their knowledge base, and offers the experience needed to become university professors and high-level supervisors and consultants.