2nd U.S. Ice Cream Maker Pulls All Products After Listeria Threat  WebMD
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
FRIDAY, April 24, 2015 (HealthDay News) -- For the second time this week, a major U.S. manufacturer of ice cream has recalled all of its products because of possible contamination with the bacteria listeria.

Ohio-based Jeni's Splendid Ice Creams said Thursday that it was recalling all of its ice creams, sorbets and ice cream sandwiches, and temporarily closing all of its scoop shops.

The company said in a statement that it took the action after possible contamination was found in one random sample that had been tested by the Nebraska Department of Agriculture.

The company said it wasn't aware of any illnesses caused by its products, and added that it issued the recall "out of an abundance of caution."

Listeria -- officially known as Listeria monocytogenes -- is a bacteria that can cause stomach illness, although it typically does not cause severe illness in healthy people. However, it can pose serious health problems for pregnant women and their newborns, older adults and people with weakened immune systems, according to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Jeni's, which is based in Columbus, has more than 20 stores in Atlanta; Charleston, S.C.; Chicago; Cleveland; Los Angeles and Nashville. It also sells its products in grocery and other retail stores nationwide and online, CNN reported.

The recall by Jeni's comes three days after Texas-based Blue Bell Creameries, the fourth largest ice cream maker in the country, pulled all of its products off the market after listeria was found in some half-gallon containers of its chocolate chip cookie dough ice cream.

In the past year, three people in Kansas have died and 10 people in four states have become ill due to listeria bacteria believed to have come from Blue Bell products, the CDC said this week.

The FDA said Thursday night that it does not believe there's a link between the listeria contamination in Blue Bell and Jeni's products.

"We are continuing to investigate both situations and will provide updated information to consumers as we learn more," agency spokeswoman Lauren Sucher said.