7 tips to keep hands looking young
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
7 tips to keep hands looking young



WebMD Feature By Siobhan Harris WebMD Feature

No matter how smooth and wrinkle free your face or how gym-toned and lithe your body - your hands may be giving your age away.

Your poor hands! If you think of all they do plus the fact they get washed umpteen times a day, it's no wonder they can look a bit forlorn sometimes.

You can look younger with great make-up but with your hands it's harder to disguise the loose skin, brown spots and veins that can appear over time.

Whether you want to avoid getting to that stage or want to improve the appearance now, here are 7 top tips to keep time off your hands!

1. Use sun cream to block UV rays

The skin on your hands is quite thin and delicate yet it's probably the part of your body that has the most exposure to the sun.

"The backs of the hands are particularly susceptible to sun damage as they tend to be exposed to low levels of sun throughout life," says Dr Edward Seaton, consultant dermatologist and British Skin Foundation spokesman.

He adds: "The main factor in this is ultraviolet light from sunlight. The effect of this is to reduce the amount of supporting collagen and elasticity in the skin, causing sagginess of the skin and thinning of the skin, which is why veins become more apparent. Ultraviolet damage to the skin also causes pigmented spots to appear, particularly in fair skinned people. The technical name for these is solar lentigos."

The advice is to use a sun block or sun cream especially in the months from April to October in the UK when the ultraviolet light is at its strongest.

If you are doing any outside sports like running, cycling, golf or sailing, put on the back of your hands as they are going to be constantly exposed.

"Serums, hand creams, hand scrubs and masks can all help improve the general condition of the hands but a good SPF will help to prevent a lot of the damage that results in skin imperfections like loss of elasticity and pigmentation spots," says advanced skin care specialist Debbie Thomas.

2. Put on some rubber gloves

Some people's hand care routine can involve washing a bowl of dishes in hot water with a hefty squirt of washing up liquid. You'll be doing your hands a favour if you put on a pair of rubber gloves beforehand or even better use a dishwasher.

"Exposure of the hands to chemicals, particularly soaps and detergents, often causes an irritant dermatitis. This is a scaly red rash on the backs of the knuckles," says Dr Seaton.

Hairdressers, healthcare workers and professional cleaners are more likely to develop this, but Dr Seaton says: "Parents, particularly mothers who have young children also develop this because they tend to wash their hands a great deal in between nappy changes and feeding etc."

Bleaches, detergents and cleaning fluids may do a great job of getting rid of grease and dirt from pans, ovens and floors but on hands they are way too harsh, stripping skin of its natural oils and causing damage over time, so wear gloves.