About us
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
About us

News Medical is an online, open-access medical information provider for healthcare professionals, medical researchers and engaged consumers.

News Medical is owned and operated by AZoM.com Limited trading as AZoNetwork, a specialist online publisher of science and engineering websites based in the UK and Australia.

Like all AZoNetwork websites, News Medical is produced by a team of specialist scientific and medical news editors. Please visit the Meet the Team page to find out more.

With visitors from over 200 countries, News Medical is now regarded as one of the leading global online medical news and health information distributors.

Source: Google Analytics

Content

In addition to sourcing and curating the latest daily medical news, News Medical conducts and publishes interviews with experts in both academia and the healthcare industry via the Thought Leaders and Insights from Industry series.

News Medical also provides encyclopedic health articles, including some feature pieces contributed by experts as part of the MediKnowledge series.

If you would like to submit news or contact us regarding a potential story please email our Editor-in-Chief .

Social Media

News Medical is active on a number of social media sites including:

Facebook  over 180,000 likes

Twitter  over 8,000 general followers, plus a significant number of Condition Specific followers

Google+ - over 1,900 people

Source: Facebook Page Insights

Sponsored content

Some content on News Medical is derived from sources where we have existing commercial relationships. Such articles are clearly labelled as sponsored content and are only accepted when the content is deemed to add value to the core editorial ethos of News Medical, which is to educate and inform site visitors interested in medical research, science, devices and treatments.

In addition to sponsored articles, News Medical also provides an equipment listings directory. All items are linked to supplier profiles.

Display advertising

In addition to sponsored content, News Medical also receives funding from display advertisements. These are subject to strict guidelines and we will refuse any advertising that we believe to be incompatible with our mission.

Advertising served "in house" is not targeted to individual users but may be placed on the site adjacent to content related to advertiser or sponsor interest. Advertisement is distinguished by the word "Advertisement".

Advertising served by Google as part of the Adsense publishing network may be targeted to an individual. We do not control Google ads. Google, as a third party vendor, uses cookies to serve ads on your site. Users may opt out of the use of the DART cookie by visiting the Google ad and content network privacy policy.

Disclaimer

News Medical contains articles on many medical topics; however no warranty whatsoever is made that any of the articles are accurate. There is absolutely no assurance that any statement contained or cited in an article touching on medical matters is true, correct, precise, or up-to-date. The overwhelming majority of such articles are written, in part or in whole, by non-professionals. Even if a statement made about medicine is accurate, it may not apply to you or your symptoms.

News Medical uses imagery under license from Thinkstock.com, Shutterstock.com and Photos.com.

For terms and conditions please visit: http://www.news-medical.net/terms