iCAD announces adoption of Xoft Axxent Electronic Brachytherapy System in Spain
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
iCAD, Inc. (Nasdaq: ICAD), an industry-leading provider of advanced image analysis, workflow solutions and radiation therapy for the early identification and treatment of cancer, today announced the first Xoft Axxent Electronic Brachytherapy (eBx) System in Spain is now available at the Hospital Miguel Servet for the treatment of early-stage breast cancer, non-melanoma skin cancer and gynecological cancers.

iCAD is highlighting the Xoft System at the third European Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology (ESTRO) Forum in Barcelona from April 24-28, 2015, where it will be available for demonstration at the Company's booth #4410.

"We are pleased with the increased adoption of the Xoft System in Europe for a variety of cancers due to its versatility and the important advantages it delivers to patients and healthcare providers," said Ken Ferry, CEO of iCAD. "The Xoft System is cleared to treat cancer anywhere in the body, requires minimal shielding and is mobile, allowing it to be used in different areas and facilities, including many smaller treatment rooms that may not accommodate larger equipment or protective shielding."

Also during the ESTRO forum, Dr. Paulo Costa, M.D., radiation oncologist of Instituto CUF Porto, Breast Surgery Unit, Senhora da Hora, Matosinhos, Portugal, will present an update on his clinical research, which examines patients who underwent intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT) treatment using the Xoft System during breast conserving surgery between April 2012 and November 2014.

"With a median 18 month follow-up clinical results continue to suggest that the Xoft System is safe with minimal side effects and low morbidity," said Dr. Costa. "As we continue to gather data, and patients and caregivers learn more about the benefits of IORT for the treatment of early-stage breast cancer, we are seeing increased patient demand for this radiation therapy option as a result of its much shorter course of treatment."