Parents lack baby first-aid knowledge
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
According to the British Red Cross, eight out of 10 parents have no first aid knowledge at all  so if their baby or child had an accident, they wouldn't have a clue.

The news isn't all that surprising. After all, being a new parent brings many challenges and new things to learn. But where babies are concerned, it's vital to have some first aid knowledge, since a baby's health can deteriorate far more quickly than that of an older child or adult.

Even if you have some first aid knowledge, it doesn't necessarily mean you have the tools to treat a baby. For instance you have to be far more gentle with babies than with adults, otherwise you could end up doing more harm than good.

Whether you're a new parent or are expecting a baby any time soon, it's well worth finding the time to learn about baby first aid  there are courses on offer (ask your pharmacist if they can recommend one), or, if you really dont have any spare time, get a book on baby first aid and read it thoroughly.

In the meantime, here's what to do if your baby becomes unconscious

First stay calm, test their responses (tap their foot gently, never shake them), then follow the ABC resuscitation procedure:

Airway: Check their airways are open and unobstructed. Tilt their head back a little using one hand then lift their chin using one finger of your other hand. If you can see any obstructions in their mouth, pick them out gently with your fingertips.

Breathing: Watch their chest to see if it rises and falls, listen for the sound of them breathing and feel for breath on your cheek. Do this for up to 10 seconds.

If they're breathing normally, cradle your baby on their side, keeping their head down and mouth open (this stops them choking on their tongue), and call 999 for an ambulance.

If they're not breathing normally, give them five rescue breaths by putting your mouth over your baby's mouth and nose and blowing gently. As their chest rises, stop blowing and allow it to fall. Repeat five times.

Circulation: Next, check for other signs such as a pulse or other movements for 10 seconds. If there are signs of circulation, give 20 rescue breaths (it should take about a minute), then dial 999 for an ambulance.

If there are no signs of circulation, perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) immediately. Place two fingers in the centre of the baby's chest and press down into the chest to a third of its depth. Press and release 30 times at a rate of about two presses per second. Then give two rescue breaths (as above). Call for an ambulance, and continue with CPR until help arrives.

Do you think more people should learn first aid?