The latest news and views from the world of mens health
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Obesity levels set to rise

According to Public Health England (PHE), 63 percent of middle-aged men could be obese within 20 years unless something is done to reverse current obesity trends.

The report, which looks at PHEs priorities for the next five years, suggests one in 10 people will develop Type 2 diabetes within the next two decades because of their weight. But if we could get the obesity rate down to what it was in 1993, more than five million cases of Type 2 diabetes could be prevented, estimates the public health body.

Need help with losing weight? Ask your pharmacist for advice on healthy eating, exercise and weight management aids that may help.

Obesity increases prostate risk

Prostate cancer is diagnosed in 41,000 men each year in the UK. And now World Cancer Research Fund scientists have found strong evidence that being overweight or obese is linked with advanced prostate cancer.

The link is so compelling, say the researchers, that excess weight should rank alongside factors such as family history when it comes to assessing prostate cancer risk.

Less booze for better sperm

Researchers writing in the journal BMJ Open suggest alcohol may have a direct impact on the quality of sperm.

In tests, men who drank 40 units of alcohol a week were found to have sperm counts that were 33 percent lower than those who only drank up to five units weekly.

The experts dont know if sperm quality improves when you reduce the amount of alcohol you drink. However, they warn that drinking a lot of alcohol on a regular basis could affect mens reproductive health.

Mens bones may not be stronger

You may associate the brittle bone disease osteoporosis with women. But according to experts from the International Osteoporosis Foundation, the rate of men dying within a year of having a hip fracture is twice as high as that in women.

Many men may also not realise that drinking too much alcohol and smoking are two of the lifestyle factors linked with osteoporosis. Ask your pharmacist if they offer help and support for giving up smoking today.

Too many men die young

The Mens Health Forum has called for action following the publication of mortality information that shows one in five men dies before the age of 65.

So many men die young and it continues to be ignored, says Mens Health Forum chief executive Martin Tod. Men deserve better.

The figures also show that men account for 71 percent of premature deaths from cardiovascular disease and 80 percent of suicides.

Lets talk about it

More men are seeking therapy, says the RSCPP, an organisation that represents more than 2,500 UK counsellors, psychologists and psychotherapists. In a survey, almost four out of 10 RSCPP therapists said their number of male clients had increased during the past 12 months.

Of the male clients seen by RSCPP therapists, 44 percent were in the 31-45 age range, with 30 percent aged 45-60 and 20 percent aged 18-30. The most common issues they wanted to discuss included relationship problems, stress, depression, anxiety and anger.

"This is a really positive sign that more men are coming forward to seek help, says RSCPP chief executive Richard Snowdon. They are debunking the generalisation we normally hear that men keep their problems to themselves.

Staying fit keeps blood pressure lower for longer

Health experts have been advising that regular exercise can help to keep your blood pressure normal and your heart healthy. And now researchers writing in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology suggest the higher a mans fitness level, the longer he may avoid the onset of high blood pressure.

In tests, those who had low fitness levels started to develop high blood pressure around the ages of 42 to 46, whereas the men whose fitness levels were higher didnt show any signs of increase in their blood pressure until about 10 years later.

Date To Remember - March 1 - 31

Prostate Cancer Awareness Month

March is for men is one of the Prostate Cancer Awareness Months slogans. Each year, the event is held during March to raise awareness about the disease as well as vital funds to help scientists find more treatments.

During this month you can help by taking part in a fundraising event  or even by organising your own. Find out more at www.prostatecanceruk.org

Six-pack workout: Around the world

Heres the latest abdominal work-out move from celebrity personal trainer Scott Laidler (www.scottlaidler.com, @Scott_Laidler), called around the world.

This kettlebell exercise works your abdominals from their natural braced position. It will also work muscles in your upper body, including the lats and rhomboids (if you dont have any kettlebells, use a pair of dumbbells instead).

You need to watch your form when doing this exercise, advises Scott. Try performing it in front of a mirror to ensure your hips stay in line. You can expect a little sway back and forth if you are going heavy, but your overall structure must stay intact.