The latest news and views from the world of health and wellbeing
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Shop around before joining a gym

Thinking of joining a gym? January is the peak time for gym memberships as many people make getting fit their New Years resolution. But before you sign up, take a look at these tips from FreebieShare.co.uk on getting the best deal:

Try before you buy Many gyms offer guest passes that allow you to try out the facilities before you join, so ask if there are any available.

Work perk An increasing number of employers have corporate gym membership, which means you could join for less or even for free through your job if such a scheme is available at your place of work.

Go budget If youre watching the pennies, consider joining one of the new breed of budget gyms such as FitSpace, The Gym and Xercise4Less, or check out the gym at your local authority leisure centre.

Try an alternative You dont need a gym to get you fit  there are lots of alternatives out there, including outdoor fitness classes and boot camps, which tend to be cheaper than the large fitness chains.

Blood pressure costs NHS billions

High blood pressure affects more than one in four adults and is one of the biggest risk factors for premature death and disability in England.

And now the latest figures from Public Health England (PHE) show that diseases caused by high blood pressure are estimated to cost the NHS more than 2 billion every year.

According to PHE, its essential to have your blood pressure checked regularly and to take simple steps such as cutting down on salt and taking more exercise to help prevent high blood pressure.

If you havent had your blood pressure checked lately, you can have it monitored at many local pharmacies. Find your nearest participating pharmacy at www.allabouthealth.org.uk

Nutrition file: Salmon

Nutrition experts recommend eating oily fish such as salmon. Heres what you should know about this nutritious fish:

Raw pink salmon is a great source of protein, with 32g in half a fillet, and no carbs or sugars.

The same serving size provides 56 percent of your recommended daily intake (RDI) of niacin, 80 percent of your RDI of vitamin B12, and 100 percent of your RDI of the mineral selenium.

Its also a good source of omega-3 fatty acids, with 1805mg in a half-fillet serving.

(Source: NutritionData.com)

Cook to cut calories

If youre counting calories, eating home-made meals instead of ready meals or takeaways could help. According to research by Appliances Direct, the average UK family could save 240,000 calories a year by making their own meals from scratch (thats the equivalent of 32 days recommended calorie intake).

The survey also suggest more than 65 percent of Brits eat ready meals five times a week. But by swapping to home-cooked foods, the average family could save not just calories but also around 2,000 a year, the survey claims.

Pharmacies set to offer more vaccines

According to the head of immunisations at NHS England, pharmacies across the country will be delivering all adult vaccines and most teenage vaccines within the next two years.

Kenny Gibson revealed the news in an interview with Chemist and Druggist magazine, claiming that pharmacies could potentially offer vaccines for shingles, HPV (human papillomavirus) and hepatitis C, among others, as well as the flu vaccine thats currently on offer.

London is likely to be the first area where pharmacists will deliver all adult and most teenage vaccines, and the rest of the country will follow, he added.

NHS website visits soar

The number of people visiting the NHS Choices website (www.nhs.uk) has increased by 40 percent within the last 12 months, says the Health and Social Care Information Centre, the outfit that runs the website.

Top searches were pregnancy and baby health, with mental health, stomach ache, chicken pox and back pain also popular topics. The website has been viewed one billion times since it was launched in 2007.

Calling all chocaholics

This March marks the first Dechox, a nationwide sponsored challenge organised by the British Heart Foundation. All you have to do is give up chocolate  even the chocolate sprinkles on top of your cappuccino  to help raise money for life-saving heart research.

Dechoxers are being encouraged to ask friends, family and colleagues to sponsor them to take on the challenge. They can also donate the money they save by resisting the temptation to buy their favourite chocolate bar or having a chocolate dessert.

So are you up for the challenge? Sign up for free at bhf.org.uk/dechox

Be prepared for... Sprains and strains

If youve decided to get fit in the New Year, overdoing it too soon could lead to a pulled muscle or a twisted ankle. Here are some pharmacy items to keep in your medicine cabinet or first-aid kit that may relieve a strain or a sprain:

Painkillers Ask your pharmacist to recommend a pain relief product to help ease any discomfort and to reduce swelling (always mention if youre taking any other medicines).

Ask your pharmacist to recommend a pain relief product to help ease any discomfort and to reduce swelling (always mention if youre taking any other medicines). Ice pack You can keep an ice pack in the freezer and apply to a strain or sprain whenever you need it (keep the ice pack covered when in contact with your skin to prevent an ice burn).

You can keep an ice pack in the freezer and apply to a strain or sprain whenever you need it (keep the ice pack covered when in contact with your skin to prevent an ice burn). Crepe bandages Handy for a sprained ankle or wrist, apply securely around the affected area after treating with ice to reduce any swelling.

Handy for a sprained ankle or wrist, apply securely around the affected area after treating with ice to reduce any swelling. Sports supports Tubular bandages or supports for wrists, ankles and knees can help to compress the injured area as well as protect it from further injury when youre back on your feet.

Easy ways to swallow pills

Many people struggle with swallowing tablets. And now researchers writing in the journal Annals of Family Medicine believe theyve developed a foolproof method to make it easier.

For capsules, stay upright but bend your head forward and swallow them with at least 20ml of water (just less than a tablespoon). But for chalky tablets, put the tablet on your tongue and swallow by drinking water from a bottle (close your lips tightly around the bottle and swallow in one quick move).

If youre having any difficulties with your medicines, your local pharmacist can give you lots of help and advice.

No-booze January leads to less drinking all year

After the excesses of the festive season, are you giving up alcohol for the month of January? New research shows those who have taken part in Dry January in previous years are now drinking less frequently, drinking less per drinking day and are getting less drunk.

The long-term effects of Dry January have previously been questioned, with people asking if a month booze-free would cause people to binge drink once February comes around, says Emily Robinson of Alcohol Concern, the organiser of the month-long campaign.

We believe Dry January can really help individuals take a positive step towards cutting down their drinking and improve their health.

Tuneful therapy

Eighty-one percent of British people say listening to music makes them feel better when theyre ill, according to a survey for BBC local radio. And the top song to listen to when youre feeling unwell or down? The survey gave Bohemian Rhapsody by Queen the top spot, followed by Dancing Queen by Abba and Pharell Williamss Happy.