Helping you make healthy resolutions for life
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
But according to NICE, while many people started the New Year wanting to change and become healthier, some are already struggling to stick to their resolutions because they arent getting the help they need.



The good news is theres plenty of support and expert advice available at your local pharmacy, including the following:



Resolution #1: Giving up smoking



Ask your pharmacist about free NHS stop smoking services and advice on nicotine replacement therapy products such as patches, gum and lozenges. You can also download the NHS Quit Smoking Widget, which delivers a daily motivational message for the first 30 days, while a real-time counter shows the minutes, hours and days youve been smoke free as well as how much money youve saved.



Resolution #2: Drink in moderation



Your pharmacist can give you lots of advice on drinking responsibly, including the current guidelines you should stick to (dont regularly drink more than three to four units of alcohol a day if youre a man or two to three if youre a woman). Other advice may include having two or three alcohol-free days a week and alternating alcoholic drinks with soft drinks when youre out on the town.



Also, find out how your alcohol intake affects your health by using our Alcohol Tracker, and for more practical advice take our Drinking Self-Assessment Test.



Resolution #3: Eat a healthy diet



Pharmacies are a great resource of information about healthy eating, so pop in to your local branch and ask about the help thats available in your area. Also try our handy interactive tools, such as our 5 a day meal planner and our Healthy Eating Self-Assessment to find out how healthy your diet is and for plenty of tips on improving it.



If you need to lose weight as well as make your diet more healthy, you may also find that your local pharmacy offers weight management services. Many people want to lose a few pounds at this time of year, so ask your pharmacist about products that could give you the support you need.



Resolution #4: Be more active



If youre not used to exercising, or if youre being treated for a medical condition, you should always check with your GP before starting any new fitness programme. Your pharmacist can also help keep you motivated by checking your blood pressure and cholesterol levels, both of which should improve as you become more active.



Meanwhile try our Fitness Self-Assessment Test to find out how fit you are right now.



To find your nearest pharmacy offering blood pressure and cholesterol screening, as well as other services including smoking cessation, weight management and health assessments, use our Pharmacy Finder tool.