News and views to help you look your best
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The perfect frame for your eyes

Thick, full eyebrows may be the height of fashion (think Cara Delevigne). But the best brow for you is the one that suits your face shape:

Round An angular brow with a high arch can really help add definition to the bone structure of a round face.

Oval This well-proportioned face shape suits almost any type of brow (lucky you)

Square Go for a softly rounded brow to offset a square jaw  but dont over-pluck into a crescent shape.

Long If your face is long, keep your brows fairly straight and long with a low arch to balance vertical features with horizontal ones.

Heart Steer clear of the bold brow look and go for a round arch to balance your pointed chin.

Fragrance notes: Winter

The fashion for fragrance changes with the seasons. And in winter, the warmer and spicier the fragrance, the better. Winter fragrances are richer and far more intense than summer ones, so look for the following ingredients, all of which create a sense of warmth and comfort:

Spices (saffron, peppercorn, clove, ginger)

Amber and sandalwood

Woods (oudh, vetiver, oakmoss, patchouli, musk)

Chocolate and caramel

Vanilla and Tonka bean

Scrub away open pores

Visible pores are almost as undesirable as wrinkles, say beauty experts. Unfortunately, theres no way to make them physically smaller. But you can reduce the appearance of your pores by exfoliating to remove any oil, dirt or dead skin cells that are making them look bigger.

Ask your pharmacist to recommend a suitable skin scrub or exfoliating wash/cream. Use regularly to keep your skin looking smooth and soft (depending on your skin type, some scrubs may be too harsh for daily use, so take care).

Banish the bags

If too many parties have taken their toll and youre left with puffy eyes or dark circles, make sure you drink lots of water to keep yourself hydrated. Your skin will need time to get back to normal, so in the meantime dab some concealer thats a shade lighter than your foundation under your eyes and blend.

A dot of highlighter or a nude eyeliner pencil in the corner of your eye will also make your eyes look brighter.

Berry tasty

For a quick make-it-yourself anti-ageing facemask, mash a handful of raspberries into a spoonful of honey. Apply the mixture to your skin and leave for 15-20 minutes before rinsing thoroughly.