When will you get your health wake-up call?
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
According to the survey results, the approach to hitting the big 4-0 is the time when many people start to worry about the long-term health implications of the bad habits they developed in their younger years.



Three quarters of those who were asked said they had been so concerned about their health that they had made serious lifestyle changes, including giving up smoking or alcohol, exercising more and eating a healthier diet.



One in two of the 2,000 adults who took part in the survey said they were worried about the possibility of reversing the damage caused by their previous lifestyle, while 64 percent said they wish they had made more effort where their health was concerned when they were younger.



So what are the most common reasons for having a health wake-up call? According to the survey, here are the top 10:

Starting to feel old Having a minor health scare Reaching a milestone birthday Having a serious health scare Seeing a friend or relative suffer from an illness caused by their lifestyle The death of a friend or relative Being told some home truths by a doctor Watching something on TV Reading an article in a newspaper or magazine Research on the internet



I have spent a lifetime dedicated to preventing and curing diseases but it never ceases to amaze me how easily people are prepared to throw away their good health by abusing their bodies with poor diet, booze and lack of exercise, says Professor Alf Lindberg, Ateronons science director.



This survey is yet more evidence of that  it seems that people leave it until they reach the age of 39 before they start to take their health seriously. But research shows us that the more you look after yourself in your early years, the more likely you are to live a longer and healthier life.



If youve had a health wake-up call recently, at whatever age and for whatever reason, why not ask your pharmacist to give you a Health MOT by checking your weight as well as your blood pressure, cholesterol level and diabetes risk? The tests are quick and easy, and in many cases you dont have to make an appointment. If, on the other hand, youre trying to quick smoking, your pharmacist can help by offering support and advice about using stop smoking products.



Find your nearest participating pharmacy by using our online Pharmacy Finder tool.

