Should hay fever be taken more seriously?
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
As anyone who has ever sniffed their way through the summer months knows, hay fever isnt something to make light of as it can have a dramatic impact on your daily life, both at home and at work. According to the survey a quarter of people with hay fever say their condition triggers unnecessary stress, with more than 15 percent admitting it has made them feel depressed and 15 percent also complaining it makes them feel ugly and unattractive when their symptoms flare up.

Meanwhile a quarter of people with hay fever claim it has a negative impact on their relationships, with a third saying their professional life has been affected and one in 10 suggesting the condition makes them less sociable.

The report also reveals that one in 10 parents believes their child struggles at school because of hay fever and that they miss out during the summer because of their symptoms.

Hay fever is so much more than just a sniffle, says paediatric allergist Dr Adam Fox. Many sufferers find it makes their nose so blocked they find it hard to breathe, especially when the pollen count is high.

That tickle in the throat can cause a persistent dry cough and other symptoms can make sleeping at night near impossible, leading to tiredness during the day  especially where children are concerned. Hay fever can also trigger asthma attacks, and sufferers are much more likely to develop asthma than others.

The survey also reveals that nearly two thirds of people with hay fever say it affects their productivity and concentration, which is no surprise to GP Rosemary Leonard.

One of the most common problems I see during the hay fever season is young people struggling to revise, says Dr Leonard. This inevitably has an adverse effect on their performance in end-of-year exams, made all the more challenging because those vitally important tests always coincide with the height of the hay fever season.

Older sufferers arent immune either. Ive seen patients who feel they cannot attend job interviews thanks to their red nose or constantly streaming eyes, which make it impossible to look presentable.

The good news is theres a range of allergy relief medicines available at your local pharmacy, where its guaranteed your symptoms will be taken seriously. Ask your pharmacist to recommend the product or products that would give you effective relief, so you can enjoy summer instead of dreading it.

Remember that different products tackle different symptoms, so its always worth having a chat with your pharmacist to find out which approach would work best for you. Find your nearest pharmacy by using our Pharmacy Finder.