Over 55s regret not looking after their teeth
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
The research suggests people living in the North East of England, Scotland and Northern Ireland are the most regretful about their past oral hygiene habits, while more men say they wish theyd looked after their teeth better than women.

Despite oral health improving significantly in recent decades many people born in the 1960s and earlier lived in an era when oral health education was not widely available and their oral health suffered as a result, explains Dr Nigel Carter, the BDHFs chief executive.

Our teeth and smile are important to many aspects of our life and cannot be taken for granted. Simply brushing our teeth last thing at night and at one other time during the day with a fluoride toothpaste, cutting down how often we have sugary foods and drinks and visiting the dentist as often as they recommend, is all we need to do to develop and maintain a healthy mouth.

On the other hand, research from the BDHF has also discovered that people aged between 16 and 24 are more conscious about the appearance of their teeth than any other age group, with two thirds saying theyre more worried about the way their teeth look compared to five years ago.

Hopefully this will lead to more improvements in oral health in future generations, adds Dr Carter, who claims a good oral health routine should start when a child has their first milk teeth.

If children dont develop a good oral health routine, they may be more likely to take bad habits into adulthood, he says, which could lead to decay, tooth loss and gum disease. This may also affect other aspects of your health, since gum disease has been linked to several serious conditions such as diabetes, stroke, heart disease and even dementia.

Once you have good oral health, it is important to maintain it as you grow older, adds Dr Carter. There is no reason for you to lose teeth, but this often happens. Bearing this in mind, people who have lost teeth and who wear dentures also need to maintain high standards of oral health, especially to protect any remaining natural teeth.

Just about everything you need to keep your teeth and gums healthy is available at your local pharmacy. Ask your pharmacist to recommend products such as toothbrushes (including electrical models), toothpaste, floss and mouthwash, and remember to see your dentist for check-ups as often as they recommend.

Find your nearest pharmacy by using our online Pharmacy Finder.

Dont forget: National Smile Month is just around the corner (May 18- June 18, 2015). For lots of tips on how to keep your smile healthy, visit www.nationalsmilemonth.org