What you need to know about Preventing and treating flu
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
How do you catch flu and what are the symptoms?

Caused by the influenza virus, flu is highly contagious and can spread quickly. You can become infected if youre exposed to someone who has the virus when they cough or sneeze, or if you touch a surface such as a table or door handle that theyve sneezed or coughed over and then dont wash your hands.

The symptoms appear suddenly, with the gap between being exposed to the virus and your symptoms starting being around two to three days (however, you can spread the virus to other people before your symptoms start).

You may suffer from a number of symptoms, such as fever, chills and aches and pains all over your body. Complications of flu include pneumonia, sinusitis and middle ear infections.

How does the flu jab work  how successful is it and how long does it last?

The flu jab works by creating antibodies that raise your body's defence mechanism if it is further exposed to the virus. However, flu viruses may change from year to year, which is why its important to have a vaccination ever year, as that way you are protected against the current strain (each year, the World Health Organisation decides which flu virus strains are likely to be circulating the following winter, so the vaccine is different from one year to the next).

The flu jab protects against the most common types of flu, but another strain can still attack. According to the Department of Health, in 2012 the success rate of the vaccination in healthy adults under the age of 65 is 59 percent, though protection may be lower in the elderly.

Who should consider having a flu vaccination and why?

Certain groups are advised to have flu vaccinations every year because flu can be more serious for some than others or because some people  such as healthcare workers  may be more likely to contract the virus than the rest of the population. These groups include:

People aged 65 or older

People with a chronic heart or chest condition  including asthma  that requires continuous treatment

People with Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes

People with a medical condition thats associated with having a lowered immune system

People with a degenerative central nervous system condition, such as multiple sclerosis or motor neurone disease

People who live in a long-term residential or care home

Healthcare workers and carers

Do children need flu jabs?

All two- and three-year-olds can have a flu jab in the form of a nasal spray on the NHS, and in some parts of the country children between the ages of four and 10 may also be offered one (all children between the ages of two and 16 will eventually be able to have the flu jab every year).

Its also advised that children over the age of six months who have a long-term health problem such as a serious respiratory or neurological condition should also be vaccinated, though some with a long-term health condition may have to have the flu injection instead of the nasal spray.

How can you get a flu jab if youre not eligible for a free one?

Many pharmacies are now trained to give flu jabs as part of a Patient Group Directive (PGD). They can administer the vaccination to some patients who are entitled to have it for free if its more convenient for them to visit their pharmacy than their GPs surgery (many pharmacies are ideally placed to provide this service because they are accessible and open long hours).

Pharmacists can also vaccinate other people who arent eligible for free flu jabs as long as they arent excluded for any reason within the PGD.

Some pharmacies also offer the free NHS flu vaccination service. Meanwhile, if youre not sure whether youre eligible for a free flu jab on the NHS, or if you want to find out how you can get a private paid-for vaccination, just ask your local pharmacist.

How can you tell the difference between a cold and flu?

Some people think they have flu when they really have a bad cold. There are, however, several distinguishing factors between the two:

Flu can last for one to two weeks and full recovery can take even longer, whereas the common cold usually runs its course much more quickly

With flu, headache can be severe  but with the common cold it is usually minor

Aches and pains are usually all over the body with flu, but with a cold you usually only get them in your legs

Flu comes with a cough and an extremely sore throat. With a cold, however, your throat may just feel scratchy

What should you do if you do catch flu?

The most important things to do if you have flu is to rest as much as possible and increase your fluid intake. Use germicidal hand wash to stop the infection spreading to other people, and avoid smoking.

There are several over-the-counter medicines you can buy at a pharmacy that may also help, including pain relief medicines such as paracetamol and ibuprofen, as well as decongestants and other inhalants, if these are suitable. Ask your pharmacist to tell you about the medicines that may provide relief, including potential supplements such as echinacea, garlic, zinc and vitamin C.

How long does flu last  and how quickly can you get back to normal?

Acute flu symptoms usually last up to a week. Complete recovery from flu, on the other hand, may take three to four weeks.

Need more advice about flu or flu jabs? Visit your local pharmacy (find your nearest pharmacy by using the Pharmacy Finder at www.allabouthealth.org.uk).

Brian Deal briandeal@yahoo.com