The latest health and wellbeing news for mums, dads and kids
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
Alcohol in pregnancy: how much is safe?

Medical experts and campaigners are calling for clearer warnings about drinking alcohol during pregnancy.

The official guidance from the Department of Health Guidance states that alcohol should be avoided altogether in pregnancy.The confusion arises when it continues and says that if you do opt to have a drink, limit to one or two units once or twice a week i.e. equivalent to one small glass of wine once or twice a week, to minimise the risk of damage to the baby.

Advice from the National Institute for Care and Health Excellence state that women should not drink alcohol during the first three months of pregnancy because of the risks of miscarriage. And for the rest of pregnancy to drink no more than one or two units of alcohol once or twice a week

Several health experts, including those from the Foetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Network, claim the advice on alcohol during pregnancy is confusing, and that the only safe amount of alcohol to drink during pregnancy is no alcohol. New draft guidelines on the subject are expected from the Department of Health soon.

Drinks that reduce cancer risk

University of East Anglia researchers claim tea and citrus fruits and juices may be associated with a lower risk of developing ovarian cancer, a disease that affects more than 6,500 women in the UK every year.

After analysing the dietary habits of more than 170,000 women, they found those who included lots of foods and drinks rich in certain plant chemicals called flavonols and flavanones were less likely to develop the disease. The main sources of these chemicals include tea, citrus fruits and citrus juices, they add.

Skin contact boosts breastfeeding

Health professionals believe there are lots of benefits of allowing immediate skin-to-skin contact between mothers and newborn babies, including help with breastfeeding.

The moments right after birth represent the ideal timeframe for initiating breastfeeding, which generates important health benefits for the baby, claim childbirth experts who are recommending that immediate skin-to-skin contact should be extended to women who have a caesarean birth.

Their study appears in the journal Nursing for Womens Health.

How to make children eat more veg

If you want to make your children more likely to eat vegetables, give them tiny amounts of vegetable puree in their milk when they are babies, say scientists from the University of Leeds.

In tests, mothers with babies aged from six months gave their babies plain milk (breast or formula) then plain rice, while others added vegetable puree to both the milk and the rice. After 24 days, all of the mums gave their babies vegetable puree  but the babies whod had puree mixed with their milk and rice earlier ate more.

Kids copy risky sports behaviours

The behaviour of professional rugby and football players may be influencing children to take more risks in sport, suggests research by personal injury firm Bolt Burdon Kemp.

More than half the 11-16-year-olds in the study said pro players who play on despite being injured are tough and should be admired.

Is smoking ruining your relationship?

The latest survey from the British Heart Foundation (BHF) suggest that 66 percent of smokers in the UK have argued with a loved one about their habit. Additionally, more than one in four admits a relationship has ended partly or entirely because of their smoking.

One in five women also admit lying to their partner about smoking, while the same number of men admit that smoking had affected their sex life.

Low libido and erectile dysfunction is a common side effect in men who smoke, says Dr Mike Knapton, associated medical director at the BHF. Smoking can also increase the risk of impotence, damage sperm and reduce sperm count.

No Smoking Day is on March 11th (visit nosmokingday.org.uk). For help with giving up smoking, chat to your pharmacist.

Brazil nuts boost female fertility

If youre a woman trying for a baby, eat more food that contains selenium. Found in nuts (especially Brazil nuts), seafood and red meat, selenium is important for the production of eggs in women. And now, health experts believe it could play a role in the early stages of conception too.

Healthy when young, healthier when older

If your heart is healthy while youre young, it could help prevent disease and disability in the future, say medical researchers.

In their 30-year study, the experts found that those who had a low risk for heart and blood vessel disease while they were young adults were 60 percent less likely to report health problems as older adults.