What you need to know about... Healthy digestion
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
What is indigestion  is it the same thing as heartburn?

Indigestion is a common problem weve all experienced from time to time. Symptoms may include pain or discomfort in the chest, heartburn, feeling bloated, nausea and wind.

While overeating is an obvious cause of indigestion, other factors such as alcohol, smoking, wearing tight clothes, eating late at night and taking certain medicines can also often be implicated.

Heartburn, on the other hand, refers to one specific symptom of indigestion and is often described as a burning in the centre of the chest. Although the causes of indigestion and heartburn may be the same, heartburn is just one of the symptoms a person suffering from indigestion may experience.

Whats the best way to treat indigestion and heartburn?

The best treatment for indigestion and heartburn is often prevention. I advise patients to look at their lifestyle and consider factors such as stress, alcohol, smoking, lack of exercise, being overweight, having a poor diet and eating habits. Often by modifying your lifestyle you can greatly reduce your symptoms of indigestion and heartburn, and in some cases even eliminate them without the need for further intervention such as medicines.

If youre still suffering from indigestion despite making lifestyle changes, there are several over-the-counter (OTC) medicines available from your pharmacy. Simple antacids are available in chewable tablet form or in a liquid, and may contain ingredients such as aluminum hydroxide, calcium carbonate, magnesium hydroxide or sodium alginate. These work by neutralising the excess acid formed in your stomach that causes indigestion.

Medicines called H2 receptor antagonists work by lowering the acid level in the stomach. Finally, the third option is a group of medicines called proton pump inhibitors (PPIs). These also restrict acid formation. They take a little longer to work then H2 receptor antagonists but can suppress acid for longer.

What are the best foods to eat to prevent constipation?

To avoid constipation, you should aim to eat 18g of fibre a day. Foods rich in fibre include fruit, vegetables, wholemeal grain (bread, pasta and rice), seeds, nuts and oats. A high-fibre diet keeps your bowel healthy and allows waste products to pass out of your body. Foods high in fibre also keep you satisfied for longer and prevent snacking and overeating.

It also helps if you drink adequate fluids  at least two litres of water a day  and take regular exercise.

But despite having adequate fibre, fluids and exercise, some people may still suffer from constipation. If thats the case, there are several types of OTC medicines you can buy from your pharmacist that may help. These types of constipation medicines medicines work differently, so always ask your pharmacist to recommend the one that would be best for you and check how long you should take it for.

How big a part does stress play in digestive upsets?

Its well accepted that stress is associated with digestive upsets. Although this may be a common problem for all of us from time to time, for some people it can be debilitating as it may stop them from going to work, effect them during exams or tests or other important social activities.

People who find that stress is causing digestive upset should aim to reduce their stress using different coping techniques. Consult your pharmacist or GP if you find your symptoms are persistent and stress reducing techniques are not working.

What are the best ways to prevent food poisoning?

Food poisoning is a common problem, with the Food Standards Agency recording around 850,000 cases of food poisoning a year. Its an acute condition caused by the ingestion of contaminated food. Organisms typically responsible for food poisoning include salmonella, shigella, E. coli and campylobacter.

Foods that are typical sources of these organisms include raw shellfish, raw eggs, raw meat/poultry, and milk. Food thats not stored, handled or cooked thoroughly at the right temperature is also a strong breeding ground for bacteria, which can lead to food poisoning.

To avoid food poisoning, always follow these steps:

Make sure your food is cooked thoroughly and hot all the way through

Store cold foods in a refrigerator at a temperature below 5C

Dont leave cooked foods out at room temperature for too long

Always wash your hands with hot water and soap before eating and when handling food during cooking

Avoid cross-contamination of food, especially when using utensils like spoons, knives, work surfaces and chopping boards

Store uncooked poultry/meat on the bottom shelf of the refrigerator to avoid contamination onto other foods

Cool left-over food quickly, then cover and refrigerate

Do certain medicines cause stomach upsets?

Some medicines can upset your tummy  if you think this has happened to you, speak to your pharmacist as soon as possible. Medicines that can cause stomach upsets include:

Aspirin and anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs)

Antibiotics

Cough mixtures

Iron supplements

Antidepressants

Never stop taking a medicine thats causing a suspected stomach upset without speaking to a healthcare professional first.

What are the main causes of diarrhoea and how should you treat it?

Diarrhoea is caused by viruses, bacteria, parasites, food poisoning, stress, over indulgence, appendicitis, medicines, inflammatory bowel disease, irritable bowel disease and cancer.

As the causes of diarrhoea are so varied, its important to determine if this is an acute or chronic problem. Bleeding from the back passage, recent travel abroad or having a temperature above 37.5C along with diarrhoea are good reasons to see your GP for further investigation. However, a case of diarrhoea lasting less than 48 hours in a generally healthy fit adult can be treated by pharmacists.

In such cases, follow these steps:

Keep drinking fluids and ask your pharmacist about oral rehydration salts. These replace not only fluid but also the glucose, sodium and potassium your body loses when you have diarrhoea

Eat small amounts of solid foods when you can (starving for 24 hours is no longer recommended)

Avoid rich, spicy food that may further aggravate your symptoms

Medicines like loperamide are often used to slow down the movement of the stool and to allow re-absorption of water from the stool, reducing frequency of diarrhoea and the watery nature of the stool.

However it is often considered acceptable to allow the diarrhoea to pass. Loperamide maybe appropriate if you need to gain control of your symptoms quickly (if you have to go to work or your symptoms are affecting your day-to-day activities, for example).

Elderly people and young children are more prone to dehydration from diarrhoea than adults, and should be seen by a healthcare professional if their diarrhoea symptoms persist for more than 24 hours.

Can digestive symptoms ever be a sign of a more serious illness?

Although digestive upset is relatively common, there are symptoms that may indicate a more serious underlying cause, including:

Bleeding from anus (back passage)

Sudden and ongoing change in bowel habit

Sudden onset chest pain, heartburn or indigestion that doesnt respond to simple antacids (in this event, call for an ambulance as it can be difficult to tell the difference between indigestion pain in the chest and pain originating from the heart)

Sudden and unexplained weight loss

Difficulty/painful swallowing

Black tarry stools

Vomiting blood

Vomit that looks like coffee grounds

If you experience any of these symptoms, see your GP for further investigation.