Migraine sufferers are missing out on normal life
HEADLINE_ARTICLE
At work, for instance, more than half of the 600 migraine sufferers involved in the survey said their condition stops them reaching their full potential, while 30 percent say that migraines have stopped them from holding down a job (increasing to 48 percent of people who have chronic migraine).



Around half feel they are missing out on a normal family life because of their headaches, while 63 percent say their migraines stop them having a good night out. More than half also say they often have to cancel social activities because of their migraines.



Having migraines may affect your personal relationships too, the survey suggests. A third of those asked say their migraines can cause arguments with their partners while 32 percent say it puts a great strain on their love life.



"We know from our members and from calls to our helpline that migraine often has an immense impact on an individuals quality of life and these new findings strongly support this," says Joanna Hamilton-Colclough, director of Migraine Action.



"People with migraine can face a lack of sympathy from others as it has a reputation as a malingerers disease. For genuine sufferers this is completely unfair and makes coping with migraine even harder, particularly at work. Yet with a little understanding the burden of migraine can be greatly reduced.



"There are now also many ways to treat and manage the condition and we would encourage people with migraine to seek the help and support which is now available.



If you have migraines, ask your pharmacist about over-the-counter (OTC) remedies that may help, including painkillers, migraine treatments that contain an ingredient called sumatriptan, and sticks and strips that are applied directly to the forehead that cool and relax your muscles.



However, if you cannot manage your migraines with OTC painkillers  or if you experience any of the following  make an appointment to see your GP:

 Aura symptoms (such as flashing lights or pins and needles) that happen on the same side of the body with every attack

 Your first migraine at the age of 50 plus

 A change in your usual migraine symptoms

 More frequent migraine attacks

Find out more about migraine, including how to tell the difference between a migraine and a headache, by reading our article Headache or migraine? Meanwhile, find your nearest pharmacy by using our online Pharmacy Finder tool.